
               THE FIRST VISITATION OF THE DISEASE—1485.

    “Sound drums and trumpets, boldly and cheerfully,
     God and Saint George! Richmond and victory!”—SHAKESPEARE.



After the fate of England had been decided by the battle of Bosworth,
on the 22d of August, 1485[349], the joy of the nation was clouded
by a mortal disease which thinned the ranks of the warriors, and
following in the rear of Henry’s victorious army, spread in a few weeks
from the distant mountains of Wales to the metropolis of the empire.
It was a violent inflammatory fever, which, after a short rigor,
prostrated the powers as with a blow; and amidst painful oppression
at the stomach, headache and lethargic stupor, suffused the whole
body with a fetid perspiration. All this took place in the course of
a few hours, and the crisis was always over within the space of a
day and night[350]. The internal heat which the patient suffered was
intolerable, yet every refrigerant was certain death. The people were
seized with consternation when they saw that scarcely one in a hundred
escaped[351], and their first impression was that a reign commencing
with such horrors would doubtless prove most inauspicious[352].

At first the new foe was scarcely heeded; citizens and peasants went
in joyful processions to meet the victorious army. Henry’s march from
Bosworth towards London resembled a triumph, which was everywhere
celebrated by festivals; for the nation, after its many years of civil
war, looked forward to happier days than they had enjoyed under the
blood-thirsty Richard.

Very shortly, however, after the king’s entry into the capital on
the 28th of August[353], the Sweating Sickness[354], as the disease
was called, began to spread its ravages among the densely peopled
streets of the city. Two lord mayors and six aldermen died within one
week[355], having scarcely laid aside their festive robes; many who
had been in perfect health at night, were on the following morning
numbered among the dead. The disease for the most part marked for its
victims robust and vigorous men; and as many noble families lost their
chiefs, extensive commercial houses their principals, and wards their
guardians, the festivities were soon converted into grief and mourning.
The coronation of the king, which was expected to overcome the scruples
that many entertained of his right to the throne, was of necessity
postponed in this general distress[356], and the disease, in the mean
time, spread without interruption and over the whole kingdom from east
to west[357].

It is agreed that the pestilence did not commence till the very
beginning of August, 1485, and was in obvious connexion with the
circumstances of the times. To return to their native country had
long been the ardent desire of the Earl of Richmond and his faithful
followers. At the age of 15, (1471,) having escaped the vengeance of
the House of York, and the assassins of Edward, he was overtaken by
a storm, and fell into the hands of Francis II., Duke of Bretagne,
who long detained him prisoner, but on the death of Edward, in 1483,
supplied him with means to enforce his claims to the English throne, as
the last descendant of the House of Lancaster. This first undertaking
miscarried. A storm drove back the bold adventurer to Dieppe, and
compelled him once more to throw himself, with his five hundred English
followers, on the hospitality of Duke Francis. Richard’s influence
with the Duke, however, rendered his stay there somewhat dangerous.
Richmond withdrew privately, and endeavoured to gain over to his cause
Charles VIII., who was yet a minor. A small subsidy of French troops,
some pieces of artillery, and an adequate supply of money, were finally
granted to his repeated solicitations. This little band was quickly
augmented to 2000 men, who were all embarked, and on the 25th of July,
1485, they weighed anchor at Havre, and seven days after, the standard
of Richmond was raised in Milford Haven[358].

They landed at the village of Dale, on the west side of the harbour,
and on the evening of their arrival, or very early on the following
morning, Richmond hastened to Haverfordwest, where no messenger had
yet announced the renewal of the civil war. It appears that he reached
Cardigan, on the northern shore, on the 3d of August, and for the
first time granted to his small but increasing army the repose of an
encampment.

After a short halt, he set forward with confidence, crossed the Severn
at Shrewsbury[359], turned from thence to Newport and Stafford,
and pitched his camp at Litchfield, probably before the 18th of
August[360]. The distance to this place from Milford Haven is 170
miles, and the road leads over wooded mountains and cultivated fields,
without touching upon any swampy lands. Litchfield, however, lies low,
and it was here that the army encamped in a damp situation, till it
broke up for the neighbouring field of Bosworth. Thither Richmond, with
scarcely 5000 men, and having his right wing covered by a morass, went
to meet his deadly foe, whose army doubled his own. The combat was at
first furious, but in two hours Lord Stanley crowned the conqueror with
Richard’s diadem[361].

All these events so rapidly succeeded each other in the course of
three weeks, that the knights and soldiers of Richmond, more and
more excited every day by fear and hope, were scarcely equal to such
exertions. Yet the very rapidity of the movements of the army was the
cause why the disease could not spread so quickly, nor obstruct the
final decision of Bosworth, although the report of it had already,
before this event, spread universal terror; so that Lord Stanley, when
authoritatively summoned by Richard to repair to his standard, sought
to gain time, and, by way of excuse, alleged the prevalence of the new
disease[362].

After the victory of Bosworth, King Henry remained two days in
Leicester, and then without further delay hastened to London, which he
reached in less than four days, unaccompanied by military parade, and
attended only by a select body of followers. The remainder of his army,
which stood greatly in need of repose after its severe toils, were not
in a condition for marching, they therefore halted in the neighbouring
towns, and were probably disbanded, according to the custom of the
age[363].

The Sweating Sickness is said not to have made its appearance in London
till the 21st of September[364], but historians have most likely
intended by that day to mark the commencement of its virulence, which
continued to the end of the following month, and lasted, therefore, in
all, about five weeks.

During this short period a large portion of the population[365] fell
victims to the new epidemic, and the lamentation was without bounds
so long as the people were ignorant that this fearful disease, unable
to establish its dominion, would only pass through the country like a
flash of lightning, and then again give place to the active intercourse
of society and the cheering hope of life.

There was no security against a second attack; for many who had
recovered were seized by it, with equal violence, a second, and
sometimes a third time, so that they had not even the slender
consolation enjoyed by sufferers in the plague[366] and small-pox, of
entire immunity after having once surmounted the danger[367].

Thus by the end of the year the disease had spread over the whole
of England, and visited every place with the same severity as the
metropolis. Many persons of rank, of the ecclesiastical and the civil
classes, became its victims; and great was the consternation when, in
the month of August, it broke out in Oxford. Professors and students
fled in all directions: but death overtook many of them, and this
celebrated university was deserted for six weeks[368]. Three months
later it appeared at Croyland, and on the 14th of November, carried off
Lambert Fossedyke, abbot of the monastery[369]. No authentic accounts
from other quarters have been handed down to our times, but we may
infer, from the general grief and anxiety which prevailed, that the
loss of human life was very considerable.



The physicians could do little or nothing for the people in this
extremity[370]. They are nowhere alluded to throughout this epidemic,
and even those who might have come forward to succour their fellow
citizens, had fallen into the errors of Galen, and their dialectic
minds sank under this appalling phenomenon. This holds good even of
the famous Thomas Linacre, subsequently physician in ordinary to two
monarchs[371], and founder of the College of Physicians, in 1518.
In the prime of his youth he had been an eye-witness of the events
at Oxford, and survived even the second and third eruption of the
Sweating Sickness; but in none of his writings do we find a single word
respecting this disease, which is of such permanent importance. In
fact, the restorers of the medical science of ancient Greece, who were
followed by all the most enlightened men in Europe, with the single
exception of Linacre, occupied themselves rather with the ancient terms
of art than with actual observation, and in their critical researches
overlooked the important events that were passing before their
eyes[372]. This reminds us of the later Greek physicians, who for four
hundred years paid no attention to the small-pox, because they could
find no description of it in the immortal works of Galen[373].

No resource was therefore left to the terrified people of England but
their own good sense, and this led them to the adoption of a plan of
treatment, than which no physician in the world could have given them
a better; namely, not to resort to any violent medicines, but to apply
moderate heat, to abstain from food, taking only a small quantity of
mild drink, and quietly to wait for four-and-twenty hours the crisis
of this formidable malady. Those who were attacked during the day, in
order to avoid any chill, immediately went to bed in their clothes,
and those who sickened by night did not rise from their beds in the
morning; while all carefully avoided exposing to the air even a hand or
foot. Thus they anxiously guarded against heat or cold, so as not to
excite perspiration by the former, nor to check it by the latter—for
they well knew that either was certain death[374].

The report of the infallibility of this method soon spread over
the whole kingdom, and thus towards the commencement of 1486, many
were rescued from death. On New Year’s Day, a violent tempest arose
in the south-east, and by purifying the atmosphere relieved the
oppression under which the people laboured, and thus, to the joy of
the whole nation, the epidemic was swept away without leaving a trace
behind[375].



It was thought remarkable, even at that time, that the Sweating
Sickness did not extend beyond the limits of England, and that,
remaining the unenviable property of that nation, it did not even
spread to Scotland, Ireland, or Calais which belonged to Britain. Much,
doubtless, was owing to the peculiarity of the climate, more still to
atmospherical changes, and something also to the habits of the people
and the circumstances of the times. It plainly appeared in the sequel
that the English Sweating Sickness was a spirit of the mist, which
hovered amid the dark clouds. Even in ordinary years, the atmosphere
of England is loaded with these clouds during considerable periods,
and in damp seasons they would prove the more injurious to health,
as the English of those times were not accustomed to cleanliness,
moderation in their diet, or even comfortable refinements. Gluttony
was common among the nobility as well as among the lower classes; all
were immoderately addicted to drinking[376], and the manners of the age
sanctioned this excess at their banquets and their festivities. If we
consider that the disease mostly attacked strong and robust men—that
portion of the people who abandoned themselves without restraint to
all the pleasures of the table—while women, old men, and children,
almost entirely escaped, it is obvious that a gross indulgence of the
appetite must have had a considerable share in the production of this
unparalleled plague.

To this may be added, the humidity of the year 1485, which is
represented by most chronicles as very remarkable[377]. Throughout
the whole of Europe the rain fell in torrents, and inundations were
frequent. Damp weather is not prejudicial to health if it be merely
temporary, but if the rain be excessive for a series of years, so that
the ground is completely saturated, and the mists attract baneful
exhalations out of the earth, man must necessarily suffer from the
noxious state of the soil and atmosphere. Under these circumstances
epidemics must inevitably follow. The five preceding years had been
unusually wet[378], 1485 proved equally so; the last hot and droughty
summer was that of 1479[379]. Extensive inundations of the Tiber,
the Po, the Danube, the Rhine, and most of the other great rivers,
took place in 1480, and were attended with the usual consequences,
the deterioration of the air, misery and disease[380]. The greatest
inundation ever remembered in England was that of the Severn, in
October, 1483. It was long afterwards called the Duke of Buckingham’s
Great Water[381], because it frustrated the rebellion of this powerful
subject against Richard III., whom he had been instrumental in placing
upon the throne; and consequently defeated also the first enterprise
of Henry VII. It lasted full ten days, and the tremendous ravages
occasioned by the overwhelming torrent dwelt long in the memory of the
people.



During the whole of this period the nations of Europe were visited
with various and destructive plagues. In 1477, the Bubo-plague
broke out in Italy, and raged without interruption till 1485[382].
It was accompanied by striking natural phenomena, among which we
may reckon an enormous flight of locusts in 1478[383] and 1482, and
remarkable inter-current diseases, such as inflammatory pain in the
side, throughout the whole of Italy in 1482[384]. In Switzerland and
Southern Germany malignant epidemics[385] appeared in the train of
drought and famine in 1480 and 1481, while putrid fever accompanied by
phrenites[386], prevailed in Westphalia, Hesse and Friesland. There had
never been in the memory of the inhabitants of these districts so many
ignes fatui as during this period. There too the people suffered from
the failure of the harvest, so that it was necessary to obtain supplies
from Thuringen[387]. France, where, under the fearful reign of Louis
XI., oppression and misery seemed to mock the gifts of heaven, became
in 1482, after a two years’ scarcity, the scene of a devastating
plague. It was an inflammatory fever with delirium, accompanied by such
intense pain in the head, that many dashed out their brains against
the wall, or rushed into the water; while others, after incessantly
running to and fro, died in a state of the greatest agony. According
to the notion of the age, this disease was attributed to astral
influences, for it could not have been brought on only by famine,
which left to the poor peasantry, south of the Loire, nothing but the
roots of wild herbs to support their miserable existence[388], since
the higher classes were also frequently attacked[389]. This fever was
without doubt accompanied by inflammation of the meninges, or even of
the brain itself, and was, perhaps, identical with that which at the
same period desolated the north-west of Germany as far as the shores
of the North Sea, only that it was heightened by the greater natural
vivacity and miserable situation of the French people, who were kept
in a state of perpetual dread by the cruel executions of Louis[390].
This pestilence occasioned the king to follow the advice of his morose
physician[391] in ordinary, and to keep himself closely confined within
the town of Plessis des Tours. It was prohibited under a heavy penalty
to speak in his presence of death which was carrying off its victims in
all directions, and forty crossbowmen kept guard in the fosse of the
castle to put to death every living thing which might approach[392].
Two years after, in 1484, virulent diseases[393] again visited Germany
and Switzerland; and thus it seemed as if the nations were everywhere
threatened with death and destruction.



From these data, which might easily be extended[394], it is evident
that the Sweating Sickness of 1485 did not make its appearance without
great and general premisory events, which for a series of years
imparted to the people of England a susceptibility to dangerous and
unusual diseases. If, besides this, we take into account the gloomy
temperament of the English, and the general depression of their
spirits, in consequence of the sanguinary wars of the red and white
roses, a series of events which seems to have shaken their faith
in an overruling Providence, we may readily conceive that it would
require but a very slight impulse to excite a powerful commotion
in the mysterious mechanism of the human body. This impulse was
evidently given by the landing of Richmond’s army in the very year
when great and portentous evils were anticipated; for on the 16th of
March, the same day when Queen Ann, the unfortunate wife of Richard
III., expired, a total eclipse of the sun enveloped all Europe in
darkness, and gave rise to gloomy prognostications[395]. Even under
ordinary circumstances, wars beget pestilential disorders—how much
more inevitably must these have arisen in the then existing state
of affairs! Richmond’s army consisted not of brave men animated by
zeal to avenge their dishonoured country or to serve a good cause.
It was composed of wandering freebooters, “vile landskneckte,” as
they were called in Germany, who assembled under his banner at
Havre,—sharpshooters formed under Louis XI., who recklessly pillaged
Normandy, and whom Charles VIII. gladly made over to Henry, in order to
free his own peaceful territories from so great a scourge[396]. This
army may not have been worse than others of the same period[397]; but
cooped up as they were for a whole week in dirty ships, they doubtless
carried about with them all the material for germinating the seeds of a
pestilential disorder, which broke out soon after on the banks of the
Severn and in the camp at Litchfield.



                      PRELIMINARY INVESTIGATION.

Before we proceed further, some account is here required of the
nature of this disease. It was an inflammatory rheumatic fever, with
great disorder of the nervous system. This assumption is supported
by the manner of its origin and its especial characteristic of being
accompanied by a profuse and injurious perspiration. From the judgment
that we are now capable of forming of the pernicious influences which
prevailed in the year 1485, it may, without hesitation, be admitted
that the humidity of that and of the preceding years affected the
functions of the lungs and of the skin, and disturbed the relation
of this very important tissue to the internal organs of life. This
is the usual commencement of rheumatic fevers, which bear the same
relation to the Sweating Sickness as slight symptoms bear to severe
ones of the same kind. The predominance of affections of the brain
and of the nerves, however, gave to the English epidemic a peculiar
character. The functions of the eighth pair of nerves were violently
disordered in this disease, as was shewn by oppressed respiration and
extreme anxiety with nausea and vomiting, symptoms to which the moderns
attach much importance[398]. The stupor and profound lethargy shew
that there was injury of the brain, to which, in all probability, was
added a stagnation of black blood in the torpid veins. We must also
take into the account a previous corruption and decomposition of the
blood, which, even if we should be disinclined to infer their existence
from the offensive perspiration of the disease itself, were proved
by striking phenomena of a similar nature that occurred in Central
Europe about the same time; for the scurvy prevailed as an epidemic,
more especially in Germany, in the year 1486, and with such severe
and unusual symptoms, that people were inclined to regard it as a
totally new malady[399]. Now such is the vital connexion of different
functions that every impediment to respiration, whether in consequence
of pressure from without, or through spasm and irritation of the nerves
from within, or even from a morbid condition of the circulating fluid,
infallibly calls forth the compensating activity of the skin, and the
body becomes suffused with an alleviating perspiration.

Thus it plainly appears that the profuse perspiration in the disease
of which we are treating, notwithstanding its apparently injurious
tendency, was the result of a commotion excited on the part of the
lungs, which was critical with respect to the disease itself; and
this is in accordance with all the causes of which we still have any
knowledge. Noxious and even stinking fogs penetrated into the organs
of respiration, and as the blood was thus so much affected in its
composition and in its vitality that its corrupt state was only to
be obviated by profuse perspiration, the inevitable consequence was
an interference with the extensive functions of the eighth pair of
nerves, which interference, as later writers relate, extended in many
cases to the spinal marrow, and brought on violent convulsions[400].
We have here only one essential cause, out of many, for this gigantic
disease, and one too which accounts for its advance and spread. It
is highly probable, for the reasons stated, and as according with
all human experience, that it first broke out in the army of Henry
the VIIth, and beyond all doubt that it spread from west to east,
and afterwards in a retrograde course from east to west. With the
perfectly equable operation of the predisposing causes, from which
the disease ought indubitably to have broken out all over England
at the same time, had the condition of the atmosphere been its sole
occasion, we must additionally presume a special cause for its progress
through towns and villages. This, according to all appearance, was to
be found in the air, impregnated with foul odours, which surrounded
the sick, and abounded in the tents and dwellings in which Henry the
VIIth’s soldiers, after various privations and hard service, amid
storms and rain, were closely crowded together. Of both causes modern
observation furnishes analogous examples. Intermittent fevers spread
more easily in air which is contaminated by sick people, and bands
of soldiers, themselves in perfect health, have not unfrequently
conveyed camp fever to remote places. It signifies very little by
what expressions of the schools these occurrences are designated; it
is best perhaps to abstain from them altogether, for they are all
inadequate, and occasion misconceptions. Contemporaries, however,
were certainly justified in not admitting the notion of contagion in
the same sense as when the term is applied to the plague, with which
they were well acquainted[401]. For very frequently cases which were
not to be explained on the principle of contagion communicated by
persons diseased, occurred among people of rank, and manifestly arose
independently of the usual causes. In these cases the fear of death,
which everywhere was the harbinger of the disease, and threw the nerves
of the chest into spasmodic commotion, gave an impulse to the malady
for which the quality of the atmosphere and luxury had long made
preparation. Had this view of contemporaries been even less impartial
than it really was, it would have found the most striking confirmation
in the sudden cessation of the pestilence throughout the whole country.
For the destructive spirits of air, which would not have been discerned
even by the proud naturalists of the nineteenth century, dispersed and
vanished for half an age in the fury of the tempest which raged on the
1st of January, 1486.





              THE SECOND VISITATION OF THE DISEASE.—1506.

    “The times were rough and full of mutations and rare
     incidents.”—_Bacon_.



At the commencement of the sixteenth century, society was very
differently constituted from what it was at the period when Henry the
VIIth unfurled his banner for victory. The darkness of the middle ages
had receded, as at the approach of a sun still hidden behind a cloud.
The mind unconsciously expanded in the unwonted light of day—the whole
earth was on the eve of renovation—new energies were to be called into
action—events more stupendous had never occurred, nor had more creative
ideas ever aroused the spirit of man. The invention of Gutenberg
burst through the bonds of mental darkness, and gave to freedom of
thought imperishable wings; unsuspected powers successively developed
themselves; and, while in Western Europe an ardent desire arose boldly
to overstep the ancient limits of human activity, the hopes of the more
enlightened fell far short of the actual result of such unexpected
events. The discovery of the New World, and the circumnavigation of
Africa, laid the foundation for great improvements; yet the events
in Central Europe, though less striking to contemporaries, were in
their consequences, infinitely more important and beneficial. The
establishment of civil order among all the nations of the West took
place at this period, which forms so important a boundary between the
middle ages and modern times. Regal power was fixed on a firm basis,
and when the castles had fallen before the artillery of the princes
and imperial cities, so that the petty feudal barons were compelled to
swear obedience to the laws, an end was put to the incessant predatory
feuds which had so long desolated Europe, and the establishment of
internal peace was followed by the security of life and property—the
first essential of refinement in manners and of the free development of
human society.

This great result of a concatenation of circumstances was not, however,
brought about without violent struggles and innovations, the effects of
which were felt for centuries; but it was probably _the establishment
of standing armies_ which had the greatest influence on European
civilization. They became indeed the pillars of civil order, but having
proceeded immediately from the pernicious mercenary system, they long
nourished the seeds of unrestrained depravity, and transmitted to later
generations the corruptions of the middle ages. The Lansquenets[402]
(Landsknechte) of the emperor, and the mercenaries of the kings of
France and England, who, during the war, had joined the smaller
branches of the standing army, were homeless adventurers from every
country in Europe, and were allured, not by military ambition, but
solely by the prospect of booty[403]. In whatever country the drum
beat to arms, they flocked together like swarms of locusts—no one knew
from whence—and defying the feeble restraints of military discipline,
indulged, during the continuance of the war, in all the unbridled
licence of a predatory life.

Hence the unbounded barbarity of their mode of warfare, which was
restrained only by the individual exertions of more humane commanders.
There was, however, a decided contrariety between this system and
the moral condition of the people of Western Europe: a contrariety
which was never entirely removed by the subsequent introduction of a
more strict military discipline, and which has been done away only
in modern times, by the establishment of regular armies on a system
more congenial to the feelings of the people. Hence the consequences
were the more pernicious, for when the armies were disbanded on the
conclusion of peace, the Landsknechts dispersed in all directions, not
to follow the plough again, or to resume their former occupations, but
to pass their time in idleness and dissipation, if enriched by booty,
and if reduced to poverty by intemperance and gambling, to infest the
country as mendicants or robbers, till a new war again summoned them
from their dishonourable mode of life[404]. Probably but very few were
ever able to rise from such deep degradation, and many fell early
victims to their vices[405], while the infection of their example
brought fresh accessions from every town and village to the mercenary
legions.



It is evident that in such a condition of affairs, the effect which
the plague produced on civil society must have been different from
that of former times. Pernicious influences which, during the middle
ages, had endangered the health of the inhabitants of towns, and had
often rendered disorders, naturally slight, in the highest degree
malignant, were for ever removed. Under this head may be mentioned
more particularly the ill-contrived construction of the houses and
streets, which even yet, in large cities, destroys the comfort of the
inhabitants of whole districts, and those not of the poorest class
only. As people acquired confidence in the security of peace, it ceased
to be necessary to protect every country town by fortifications.
The walls were thrown down, the stagnant moats were filled up, and
as people were no longer limited to a narrow space, they built more
convenient houses in airy streets; the dark alleys and damp dwellings
under ground were gradually abandoned, and a more comfortable mode of
living superseded the former misery. By this means the mortality was
considerably diminished, and the power of epidemics was checked; nor
can it be doubted, that the better administration of the laws greatly
obviated the dissolution of social ties in times of plague, and the
effects of superstition and religious animosity, which had formerly
been so frightful. These inestimable national improvements, however,
took place but gradually, and were not a little retarded for a time by
the new evil of the employment of mercenaries. For as the germs of vice
were scattered in all directions by the wandering Lansquenets, so also
the infection of noxious diseases found easier entrance into the towns
and villages through the medium of this dissolute and widely spread
class of men. The Lansquenets of the sixteenth century, as spreaders
of contagion, supplied the place of the former Romish pilgrims and
flagellants; they even proved a more permanent scourge than those
wanderers of the middle ages, who only made their appearance on
extraordinary occasions. We need here only call to mind the malignant
and beyond measure noisome lues which at the end of the fifteenth
century spread with the rapidity of lightning over all Europe. It was
not an importation from the innocent inhabitants of the New World, nor
was it bred by the ill-treated Marrani[406], the victims of the Spanish
Inquisition. It was the mercenary army of Charles the VIIIth in Naples
(1495), whose excesses gave to the already existing poison a malignity
till then unknown, and prepared for the deeply rooted depravity, a
scourge at which all the world shuddered with horror. It is, moreover,
in place here to observe that, in the larger armies which the new
military system now brought into the field, the ordinary camp diseases,
to which another very fatal one was added[407], were of course much
more extensively propagated than in the less numerous forces of
preceding centuries, and consequently that the peaceful inhabitants
of the towns and of the country at large were thereby exposed to much
danger.



Meantime Europe was frequently and very severely visited by the
epidemics of the middle ages, the terrors of the constantly recurring
plague being borne with gloomy resignation to the inevitable evil
with which, as a merited chastisement, the anger of God, according
to the notion of the times, afflicted the human race. Even the
English were not exempt from this fearful visitation, which, in the
year 1499, carried off 30,000 people in London alone, so that the
king found it advisable to retire with all his court to Calais[408].
Thus the recollection of the Sweating Sickness of 1485 was gradually
obliterated. No one thought of its possible return, and all the world
was occupied with other matters, when the old enemy unexpectedly again
raised his head in the summer of 1506, and scared away this comfortable
state of false security. The renewed eruption of the epidemic was not,
on this occasion, connected with any important occurrence, so that
contemporaries have not even mentioned the month in which it began
to rage. Towards the autumn it had again disappeared, and as no new
symptoms were added to the disease, the form of which was identified
by a reference to the old descriptions, it was immediately treated by
the same means, the efficacy of which those who had witnessed the
epidemic of 1485 lauded with so much reason[409]. Every exposure to
heat or cold was, as at that time, avoided, and the malignant fever
was left to the curative powers of nature, the patient being kept
moderately warm in bed; and no powerful medicines being administered.
The result was beyond all expectation favourable, for in few houses did
any fatal cases occur. The victory over this dreaded enemy was now, by
a pardonable error, attributed more to human skill than to the mildness
of the malady on this occasion, which, even under a less judicious
treatment of the sick, would certainly not have been marked by any
considerable degree of severity.

The disease broke out in London, but whether it penetrated to the
west or not, contemporary writers, being soon convinced of its slight
character, have left us no intelligence. However widely it may have
spread, it certainly was confined to England, and nowhere occasioned
any great mortality.



As the epidemic was on this occasion so very mild, it was not
accompanied by any remarkable phenomena in England, but the case was
otherwise in the rest of Europe, as will be proved by the following
details. After a wet summer, in the year 1505, a severe winter set
in[410]. Comets were seen in this as in the following year. An
eruption of Vesuvius also took place in 1506[411], which may be
mentioned, although it is well established that volcanic commotions
are to be taken into account only in great pestilences, not in less
extensive epidemics. In England there blew a violent storm from the
south-west, from the 15th till the 26th of January, 1506, which drove
the king of Castille, Philip of Austria, with his consort Johanna,
from the Netherlands to Weymouth; and as, some days before, a golden
eagle falling from St. Paul’s church, in London, had crushed a black
eagle which ornamented some lower building, evil predictions were
promulgated among the people respecting the fate of this son of the
emperor[412]. This event, however, could not be considered as at all
connected with the pestilence which broke out about half a year
afterwards. More consideration is due to the gloom and anxiety which
at that time depressed the spirit of the English nation. The reckless
avarice of Henry the VIIth, named the English Solomon[413], gave just
ground for doubts regarding the security of property; and the pious
foundations—those accustomed means of softening the dreaded wrath of
heaven, which the king, who became gradually more and more broken
down by disease, established, could not efface the recollection of
the arbitrary violence and extortions of his corrupt servants[414].
Although these extortions principally affected the wealthy nobility,
who were much in need of restraint, yet dark mistrust was general,
and all cheerfulness was banished from the minds of the people. This
state of feeling might have been favourable to the propagation of the
returning disease, but the genius of the year 1506 would not suffer it
to be more than a slight and transient reminiscence of a mystically
hidden danger, the import of which was not apparent to any medical
inquirer of the 16th century.



Thus, if we paid attention, as usual, only to the palpable occurrences
which take place on the earth and beneath its surface, the Sweating
Sickness of the above-mentioned year might appear to be unconnected
with more considerable commotions of organic life. The powers of
nature, however, are in their operations too subtle to be comprehended
by our dull senses and by the coarse mechanism of our organs; nay,
precisely at a time when neither the one nor the other indicate
any alteration around us, those operations bring to light the most
extraordinary phenomena in the human frame—that most sensitive index
of secret influences on life. This observation was fully confirmed at
the time of the first return of the sweating fever. For whilst this
disease remained confined to England, there appeared in the southern
and central parts of Europe a new and fatal epidemic, which thenceforth
visited these nations almost continually with intense malignity. This
was the petechial fever, a disease unknown to the older physicians,
which was first observed in 1490, in Granada, where it threatened to
annihilate the army of Ferdinand the Catholic, and made great havoc
also among the Saracens[415]. The bubo plague had immediately preceded
it, (1483, 1485, 1486, 1488, 1489, and 1490[416],) and it may with no
small probability be assumed that the petechial fever had resulted from
this as a peculiar variety, since in other countries also, fifteen
years later, the bubo plague degenerated in various ways, and examples
are not wanting in which particular forms or constituent parts of great
epidemics thus branch off from them, in the same manner as, under
favourable circumstances, these will combine together, and united into
one destructive whole, multiply the sources of danger.

Yet some contemporaries were of opinion that the petechial fever had
been brought over to Granada[417] by Venetian mercenaries from Cyprus,
where they had fought against the Turks, and where this disorder was
said to have been indigenous. Notwithstanding some good works[418]
already existing, this matter has need of a more thorough examination,
which might bring to light important and instructive results,
respecting the rise and spread of the petechial fever, and especially
respecting its relation to other plagues. Whatever may be held with
regard to the true origin of this fever, thus much is established,
that it was at first an independent European disease, and that, at the
commencement, having occupied the southern part of this quarter of the
world, it then became connected, in a manner as extraordinary as it was
worthy of observation, with the sweating sickness of the north; since
the nearly simultaneous eruption of the sweating fever in England, with
the great epidemic petechial fever in the year 1505, may be justly
attributed to an influence common to both, although unquestionably of
greater power in the latter.

The epidemic petechial fever, of which we are now treating, prevailed
principally in Italy, and is described by Fracastoro as the first
plague of this kind which ever appeared in that country. Of this new
disease[419], which was placed by this great physician midway between
the bubo plague and the non-pestilential fever, the contagious quality
showed itself from the beginning; yet it was plainly perceived, that
the contagion did not take effect so quickly as in the bubo plague,
that it was not conveyed so easily by means of clothing and other
articles, and that physicians and attendants on the sick were the
only persons who incurred much danger of infection. The fever began
insidiously, and with very slight symptoms, so that the sick in
general did not so much as seek medical aid. Many persons, and even
physicians among the number, suffered themselves to be deceived by this
circumstance, and thus, not being aware of the danger, they hoped to
effect an easy cure, and were not a little astonished at the sudden
development of malignant phenomena. The heat was inconsiderable, in
proportion to the fever, yet those affected felt a certain inward
indisposition, a general depression of all the vital powers, and a
weariness as if after great exertion. They lay upon their backs with an
oppressed brain, their senses were blunted, and in most cases delirium
and gloomy muttering, with bloodshot eyes, commenced from the fourth
to the seventh day. The urine was usually clear and copious at the
beginning, it then became red and turbid, or resembling pomegranate
wine, (granatwein,) the pulse was slow and small, the evacuations
putrid and offensive, and either on the fourth or seventh day red
or purple spots, like flea-bites, or larger, or resembling lentils,
(lenticulæ,) which also gave a name to the disorder, broke out on the
arms, the back, and the breast. There was either no thirst at all, or
very little; the tongue was loaded, and in many cases a lethargic state
came on. Others, on the contrary, suffered from sleeplessness, or from
both these symptoms alternately. The disease reached its height on
the seventh or on the fourteenth day, and in some cases still later.
In many there existed a retention of urine with very unfavourable
prognosis. Women seldom died of this fever, elderly people still more
rarely, and Jews scarcely ever. Young people, on the other hand, and
children died in great numbers, and especially from among the higher
ranks, while the plague, on the contrary, used generally to commit its
ravages only among the poorer classes. An inordinate loss of power in
the commencement betokened death, as also a too violent effect from
mild aperient means, and a failure in alleviation after a complete
crisis. Patients were seen to die who had lost to the extent of three
pounds of blood from the nose. It was also a very bad sign when the
spots disappeared, or broke out tardily, or were of a blackish-blue
colour. Phenomena of an opposite character, on the contrary, afforded
hope of recovery.

The best physicians were agreed on the importance of the petechiæ as an
indication of the nature of the crisis; for those cases in which they
were abundant and of a good quality were cured much more easily than
those in which the eruption was suppressed. An abundant perspiration
also was particularly conducive to recovery, whereas all other
evacuations, especially a flux from the bowels, proved to be injurious
and even fatal.

If we keep these phenomena in view, and consider, moreover, that in
the widely extending lues venerea of those times cutaneous eruptions
predominated over the other symptoms, the English sweating sickness
in the north of Europe will appear, as in connexion with this
circumstance, of a very important character; and the supposition,
that the morbid activity of the system during the whole of this age,
maintained a decided determination to the skin, may thence be fairly
considered as something more than a mere conjecture.

This fact speaks for itself, but the causes of this altered temperament
of the body it is not an easy matter to discover. Fracastoro, who knew
much better than his modern followers how to manage his sagacious
doctrine of contagion, looked for these causes in the quality of the
air, which was manifest by much more evident phenomena in the epidemic
petechial fever of 1528 than in that of 1505, and he traced an active
connexion between this quality, which he called “infection of the
atmosphere,”[420] and the condition of the blood; thus indicating
unknown influences by an obscure notion. He considered the altered
quality of the blood according to the established views of that period,
which the petechial spotted fever seemed clearly to confirm, as a
putrefaction; and he even assumed that, in the non-epidemic petechial
fevers, which, from the year 1505 forward, frequently occurred,
isolated causes must have given rise to changes in the blood, as well
as that quality of the air, to which this great physician attributed
the general and continued alterations which take place in the nature of
diseases.

The petechial fever made the same impression on the physicians of Italy
as new disorders have ever made; for although they were the best in
Europe, their view was bounded by the horizon of Galen, within the
limits of which the novel phenomenon was not to be found. They were
therefore soon perplexed, and whilst they sought to entrammel the
dreaded enemy with scholastic doctrines of repletion and acrimony and
occult qualities, and betook themselves first to one remedy and then
to another, they exposed themselves to the derision of the people,
who soon perceived their disagreement and indecision, and, as usual,
charged on the whole medical profession the well merited blame of
individuals[421].



About the same period, in October, 1505, a very fatal disease broke out
in Lisbon, the further progress of which was marked by the terror, the
flight, and the confusion of the inhabitants[422]. Of what kind it was,
whether a petechial fever or a bubo plague, and what connexion it had
with a pestilence in Spain which had just preceded it, it would perhaps
be difficult now to ascertain. This latter pestilence had spread from
Seville, following an earthquake, and violent storms of wind and rain
in 1504, and may very likely have been a bubo plague. Similar notices
are met with of pestilences occurring in that country in 1506, the
year of the English Sweating Sickness, in 1507 and 1508, in which
years mention is made of swarms of locusts in the neighbourhood of
Seville, and finally in 1510, the year of a great influenza[423], and
1515. Exact descriptions, however, of these disorders are entirely
wanting[424].

With all the above phenomena, the epidemics which took place in
Germany and France at the commencement of the sixteenth century,
evidently unite to form a connected whole. Varying in intensity and
extent, they continued without intermission for full five years, and
moreover were accompanied by unusual circumstances, such as occur only
in the time of great pestilences. The century was ushered in by the
appearance of a comet[425], which, on this occasion, seemed to confirm
the long cherished belief that the appearance of these heavenly bodies
was prognostic of evil. For mankind are in the habit of concluding that
phenomena which are simultaneous must have some internal connexion, and
many examples were called to mind in which great pestilences affecting
the whole world had been either preceded or accompanied by comets[426].
Immediately afterwards a great murrain among cattle took place,
which may have proceeded from some injurious quality in their food.
A notion immediately arose that the pastures were poisoned, and of
this there was so firm a conviction, that the most violent resentment,
as of old, in the time of the Black Death, prevailed against the
supposed poisoners, and in the neighbourhood of Meissen some “böse
Buben” (wicked knaves) who had fallen under suspicion, were actually
executed[427].

A very considerable blight of caterpillars which, in the north
of Germany, stripped the gardens and woods far and wide of their
foliage, deserves to be here mentioned as a phenomenon appertaining
to the lower grades of the animal kingdom[428]. Natural history has
shewn that occurrences of this kind are by no means occasioned by
new and wonderful influences, but rather by unusual combinations of
circumstances, appearing to occur together almost accidentally, at a
given time; especially by the simultaneous union of warmth and humidity
in the atmosphere, whereby sometimes one and sometimes another of the
lower grades of animal existences becomes extraordinarily developed. It
is on this account that unusual phenomena in the insect world, whether
it be the appearance or the disappearance of particular kinds, take
place much more frequently when the order of succession in the seasons
and the condition of the atmosphere are in a greater degree than
usual and more permanently disturbed; and thus those phenomena have,
with much reason, ever been considered as forerunners of pestilences,
whenever the human frame has become, through atmospherical causes,
generally susceptible of disease. Swarms of locusts have appeared
before and during most great pestilences, and indeed the exuberant
production of this insect appears, at least in Europe, to require the
most unusual combination of causes.



Of rarer occurrence, but quite as important in reference to the
general tendencies of life, are _the luxuriant growths of the minutest
cryptogamic plants in the water, and on damp things of all kinds_,
which, from their spots of various forms and colours, produced the
utmost horror both before and during great pestilences, and excited
superstitious fears, as appearing to be something miraculous. These
spots (signacula), and especially the _blood-spots_, were seen at a
very early period, as for instance during the great general plague
in the sixth century[429], and again, during the plague of the years
786[430] and 959, when it is said to have been remarked, that those
on whose clothes they frequently appeared, and seemingly imparted to
them a peculiar odour, were more susceptible than other people of
attack from leprosy, on which account this spotted appearance was
inconsiderately called the clothes leprosy[431], (Lepra vestium;) not
to mention other examples[432] in which plagues affecting the human
species did not take place. The same signs also, in the years from
1500 to 1503, threw the faithful into great consternation, because,
as on former occasions, they fancied they recognised in them the form
of the cross[433]. The phenomenon on this occasion spread throughout
Germany and France, and from its great extent and long duration, may
be reckoned among the most remarkable of the kind. The spots were of
different colours, principally red, but also white, yellow, grey,
and black, and arose, often in a very short time on the roofs of
houses, on clothes, on the veils and neck handkerchiefs of women, on
various household utensils, on the meat in larders, &c. A historian,
who speaks also of blood-rain[434], recounts that they could not be
got rid of in less than ten or twelve days, and that they frequently
occurred in closed chests, on linen and on articles of clothing[435].
Much information is not to be expected from the researches of the
naturalists of those times, but there is no doubt that what is
described was some one or more kinds of mould[436], inasmuch as the
whole phenomenon evidently corresponds with modern observations[437].
Scientific physicians of the sixteenth century, among whom the
naturalist George Agricola, who was born in 1494, and died in 1555,
ought especially to be mentioned, recognised, even then, these spots
as lichens, and without seeking to account for them by supernatural
agencies, or lending credence to popular superstition, they gave them
their just interpretation as indications of extensive disease[438].
Should the too bold notion of Nees v. Esenbeck, that fungi of the most
minute forms have their origin in the higher regions of the firmament,
and descending to the surface of the earth, produce spots and stains,
be confirmed, which is not yet the case, these “signacula” would have
a much more important connexion with epidemics than can be otherwise
conceded to them; for though it be highly probable that they have
their origin only in the dissemination of germs in the lower strata
of the atmosphere, it must yet be granted, that if they appear over
a considerable space, and during a long time, as at the commencement
of the sixteenth century, the causes favouring their generation and
spread, must be ranked among those of an extraordinary kind, and on
this very account may exercise an influence over human organism, as was
then evident.

For so early as the fruitful year 1503, the plague, which had already
appeared partially, made great advances, and France in particular
was visited by so fatal a pestilence, that the inhabitants of towns
and villages, in order to escape the infection, fled in bodies
to the woods, and even the house-dogs became wild, which never
happens, unless a country be extensively depopulated[439]. They were
obliged to establish great hunts, in order to free the country from
these new beasts of prey, and from wolves which appeared in great
multitudes[440]. The dry and continued heat of the following year,
1504, having given rise to still more extensive sickness, and caused
a failure in the crops, the bubo plague raged in Germany with such
violence, that in some places a third part, and in others as many as
half the inhabitants perished. Various kinds of fevers accompanied
this overwhelming disease, among which there was one distinguished
by headache and phrensy similar to that which appeared in France, in
1482[441]. Various putrid fevers and putrid inflammations of the lungs
with bloody expectoration, are also no less plainly discernible from
the accounts[442]. This diversified and general sickness throughout
the whole of Germany, terminated in the cold winter of 1504–5 and the
following summer, during which there was a continued murrain among
cattle. It is certain, that at that time the petechial fever in Italy,
had not yet passed the Alps.

_From all these facts it is a probable conjecture, that the Sweating
Sickness which visited England in the year 1506, although accompanied
in that country itself by no prominent circumstances, was not without
connexion with the morbid commotion of human and animal life in the
south and middle of Europe, and may perhaps be regarded as having
been the last feeble effort of mysterious agencies in the domain of
organized being._





               THE THIRD VISITATION OF THE DISEASE.—1517

    “This learned Lord, this Lord of wit and art,
     This metaphysick Lord, holds forth a Glasse,
     Through which we may behold in every part
     This boisterous prince.”—HOWELL[443].



The ordinances of Henry the VIIth, which, although adapted to the
times, bore hard upon the people, soon produced their fruits. The great
diminished the number of their servants, and as, moreover, many of the
peasantry were thrown out of employment in consequence of a conversion
of large tracts of arable land into pasture[444], the population of
towns increased even to an overflow, and the consequent activity of
trade gradually rendered the towns flourishing. But this change took
place too rapidly. Wealth and luxury engendered, it is true, numerous
wants which were a source of gain, so that the English were at this
time considered luxurious and effeminate[445], but there was a general
scarcity of workmen and artists, and hence it happened, that from
Genoa, Lombardy, France, Germany and Holland, innumerable foreigners
immigrated and took possession of the most lucrative branches of
employment. This was a peculiar hardship on the natives, who from
their imperfect knowledge of the arts, could not compete with the more
skilful foreigners, and were besides treated by them with insolence and
contempt. The distresses of the poor thus increased yearly, and their
indignation at length broke out. A great insurrection of the English
artisans arose throughout London, and might have proved destructive to
the foreigners, had affairs been in a less orderly state. The popular
commotion was, however, suppressed without any considerable sacrifice,
and Henry the VIIIth on a solemn day, appointed at Westminster, for
passing judgment upon the prisoners, bestowed a pardon on them; for he
saw into the causes of their discontent, and very soon after caused
restrictive alien laws to be enacted[446].



All this took place in April and May of the ever memorable year 1517,
and London was again indulging in hopes of better days, when the
Sweating Sickness once more broke out quite unexpectedly in July, and
in spite of all former experience, and the most sedulous attention,
inexorably demanded its victims. On this occasion it was so violent and
so rapid in its course, that it carried off those who were attacked in
two or three hours, so that the first shivering fit was regarded as the
announcement of certain death. It was not ushered in by any precursory
symptoms. Many who were in good health at noon, were numbered among
the dead by the evening, and thus as great a dread was created at
this new peril as ever was felt during the prevalence of the most
suddenly destructive epidemic: for the thought of being snatched away
from the full enjoyment of existence without any preparation, without
any hope of recovery, is appalling even to the bravest, and excites
secret trepidation and anguish. Among the lower classes the deaths
were innumerable[447]. The city was moreover crowded with poor; but
even the ranks of the higher classes were thinned, and no precaution
averted death from their palaces. Ammonius of Lucca, a scholar of
some celebrity, and in this capacity private secretary to the king,
was cut off in the flower of his age, after having boasted to Sir
Thomas More, only a few hours before his death, that by moderation
and good management he had secured both himself and his family from
the disease[448]. Also of those immediately about the king, Lords
Grey and Clinton were carried off, besides many knights, officers and
courtiers. Mourning supplanted the hilarity and brilliancy of the
festivals, and the king, while in miserable solitude, into which he
had retired with a few followers, received message after message from
different towns and villages, announcing, that in some a third, in
others even half the inhabitants were swept off by this pestilence.
It had never before raged with so much fatality. The minds of men had
never before been so frightfully appalled. The festival of Michaelmas,
(29th September,) which in England was always kept with much religious
pomp, was of necessity postponed; nor was the solemnity of Christmas
observed, for there was a dread of collecting together large assemblies
of people[449], on account of the contagion; and just about this time,
when the Sweating Sickness had abated, the plague, according to the
account of some historians, began, which, although probably not very
virulent, prevailed during the whole winter in most English towns,
and continued to keep up the distress of the people. The king on this
occasion also quitted his capital, and retreated, in company with a few
attendants, before the contagion, frequently shifting his court from
place to place. It was during this period of trouble (11th of February,
1518) that the Princess Mary, afterwards Queen, was born[450].

Thus the Sweating Sickness lasted full six months, reached its
greatest height[451] about six weeks after its appearance, and
probably spread from London over the whole of England. In Oxford and
Cambridge it raged with no less violence than in the capital. Most of
the inhabitants of those places were, in the course of a few days,
confined to their beds, and the sciences, which then flourished, for
they were never more zealously cultivated in England than at that time,
suffered severe losses by the death of many able and distinguished
scholars[452]. Scotland, Ireland and all other countries beyond sea,
were on this occasion spared. The neighbouring town of Calais alone was
reached[453] by the pestilence; and according to later observations,
it may be considered as certain, that only the English who resided
there, and not the French inhabitants, were affected, as it is also
ascertained that the rest of France continued throughout free from
the disease. Had this not been the case, contemporary writers would
undoubtedly not have omitted to make mention of so important an
occurrence.



The influences which gave rise to this third eruption of the disorder
among the English nation are obscure, and do not altogether correspond
with those of the years 1485 and 1506. Thus it is especially
remarkable, that, on this occasion, there is no express mention of
the humidity which had so decided a share in the origin of the two
former visitations of the Sweating Sickness, and the year 1517 was in
most respects one of an ordinary kind. The English Chronicles state
nothing remarkable on the subject, and from those of Germany we only
learn that the winter of 1516 was very mild, and that a fruitful summer
with an abundant vintage[454] and a cold winter followed. The summer
of 1517 was unfruitful, although not on account of wet weather, so
that in some parts, especially in Swabia, provision was made against
a scarcity[455]. A great comet appeared in 1516[456], and in 1517 an
earthquake was felt at Tübingen, Nördlingen, and Calw, during a violent
storm, whereupon the “Haupt Krankheit”[457] (encephalitis), accompanied
by fever, became more prevalent, although not remarkably fatal[458].
This phenomenon (the earthquake) was by no means unimportant[459] in
its effects, and there is reason to suppose that it was followed by
subterraneous commotions of still greater extent, for earthquakes
occurred also in Spain[460]. As the date of this event is specified as
the 16th of June, and as earthquakes occurring in unusual localities,
that is to say, in districts not volcanic, are frequently cited as
prognostics of great diseases, although in volcanic districts they
evidently betoken nothing of the kind, we may hence with some reason
assume a telluric influence, which perhaps reached the locality of the
pestilence that broke out at the beginning of July, if not earlier.
Besides, we cannot find any greater phenomenon, which, according to
human conception, could have had a more immediate connexion with the
English Sweating Sickness; and in this instance too, inquiry the most
circumspect does not penetrate through the thick veil which envelopes
the inscrutable causes of epidemics.



That next to the peculiar constitution which England imparts to her
inhabitants, the predisposing causes of the Sweating Sickness lay in
the habits of the English of those times, no one can possibly doubt.
The limitation of the pestilence to England plainly indicates this.
Not a single ship conveyed it to the French, or to the Dutch, who
breathed a much moister atmosphere; and yet the intercourse between the
English seaports and these immediately neighbouring nations was very
frequent. Of intemperance, which most generally lays the foundation
for disorders, both high and low were at this time accused. This vice
of the English was proverbial in foreign countries[461]. Flesh meats
highly seasoned with spices were indulged in to excess; noisy nocturnal
carousings were become customary, and it was also the practice to
drink strong wine[462] immediately after rising in the morning. Cyder,
which in some parts, as for instance in Devonshire, is the common
beverage[463], was, even in those times, considered by medical men
as injurious, for it was observed that its use caused debility with
paleness, and sapped the vigour of youth in both sexes[464]. Other
similar facts respecting the mode of living at that time might perhaps
be adduced, from which it would appear that, owing to the total want
of refinement in diet, much that was improper was employed in English
cookery, and that on this account the constitution was much injured.
Horticulture, which the French had already brought to a state of
great improvement[465], was still quite in its infancy in England.
It is even said that Queen Catherine had pot-herbs brought from
Holland for the preparation of salads, as they were not procurable in
England[466]. Allowing that this account may not be strictly true,
since it admits of other explanations, still it proves in itself what
we would here enforce, and leaves us to draw conclusions from it beyond
the mere fact of there being a scarcity of culinary vegetables. Much
more important, however, as respects our subject, was the custom of
wearing immoderately warm clothing, of which we have accounts worthy
of credence. From youth upwards the head was covered with thick
caps, in order to secure it from every chance of cold, and from the
least draught of air; and as, by this injurious practice, the brain
was subjected to a continual determination of blood, and a tenderness
of the skin was induced, there was no disorder more frequent among
the English in this century than catarrh[467], which was constantly
reproduced by relaxing perspirations and heating medicines. If this
malady be complicated with a scorbutic habit, or if it befall persons
of debauched habits, whose vessels contain nourishment not properly
concocted, the preservative vital power seeks a vent through the
relaxed skin, and that which in itself is a needful and alleviating
excitement of this tissue becomes a disease; the wholesome excretion
degenerates into a colliquative drain, which forcibly carries off
with it unusual animal matters that ought not to pass away through
such an outlet, and the body yields to an attack to which it has been
thus long predisposed. When we consider this debilitated state of the
skin as the general complaint in England, taking into account the
prejudicial influence of hot baths[468], which were much in use, and
the diaphoretic medicines employed in most disorders; when we bear in
mind the rare use of soap at that time, and the high price of linen, as
also the extreme indigence of the lower classes, which almost always
breeds pestilences, the utterly miserable condition and truly Scythian
filth of the English habitations[469], and finally, the crowded state
of London in the year 1517, we shall, as far as human research can
penetrate, find the origin of the Sweating Sickness in this very year
explicable from causes which have long been known to be capable of
producing such effects. Something remains in the background, of which
hereafter.



The rapid spread of the Sweating Sickness all over England as far as
the Scottish borders, and across to Calais, now demands a more especial
consideration. Most fevers which are produced by general causes, as
well transient (epidemic) as constant and peculiar to the country
(endemic), or a union of both, which almost always takes place, and was
here evidently the case, propagate themselves for a time spontaneously.
The exhalations of the affected become the germs of a similar
decomposition in those bodies which receive them, and produce in these
a like attack upon the internal organs; and thus a merely morbid
phenomenon of life shews that it possesses the fundamental property
of all life, that of propagating itself in an appropriate soil. On
this point there is no doubt,—the phenomena which prove it have been
observed from time immemorial, in an endless variety of circumstances,
but always with a uniform manifestation of the fundamental law. All
nations too, and from the most ancient times, have invented ingenious
designations for these occurrences, which, however, seldom represent
the general notion, but commonly only the peculiar propagation of
individual diseases. Certainly one of the best and the most ingenious
is that which is conveyed by the German word “Ansteckung,” “setting
on fire,” which compares the exciting a disease in the appropriate
body, with the inflammation of combustible matter by the application
of fire, or with the kindling of powder by a spark. But how various
are these “Ansteckungen!”, from the purely mental, on the one hand,
which, through the mere sight of a disagreeable nervous malady—through
an excitement of the senses that shakes the mind, penetrates into the
nerves, those channels of its will and of its feelings, and produces
the same disorder in the beholder, to those, on the other hand, which
propagate diseases that principally operate only upon matter, and are
distinguishable but little, if at all, from animal poisons. The reader
must not here expect all the features of a doctrine which extends
through the whole immeasurable domain of life. They are clearly
derived from the confirmed and well applied experience of _the past_,
and have been delineated by men[470] who had not forgotten, like their
modern successors, to take a comprehensive view of epidemic diseases.
It may, however, be permitted me just to call to mind the difference
between those infectious diseases which are _permanent_ and for
centuries together _unchangeable_, and those which are _temporary_ and
_transient_. The infecting matter of the former may aptly be called
the perfect or unchangeable in contradistinction to the imperfect or
mutable character of the latter. The former, when once formed, whether
in diseased persons or inanimate substances (fomites), are always
in existence, and are but called into activity by those causes of
general disease (epidemic constitutions) which are favourable to their
propagation; and it is to be remarked that under all circumstances, and
at all times, they excite the same unchangeable diseases, and, varying
only in particular ramifications or degenerations and mild forms, never
lose their proper essence. Examples are furnished in the small-pox, the
plague, the measles, and, if we may include diseases not febrile, the
leprosy, the itch, and the venereal disease. The latter, on the other
hand, are not always in existence, they are called forth from nonentity
by the causes of general diseases or epidemic constitutions, and they
disappear again after the extinction of the epidemic diseases by which
they were bred; they likewise vary in their development and their
course in each particular epidemic. Examples are found in the yellow
fever, in catarrh or influenza, in nervous and putrid fever, and, among
many other disorders, in miliary fever, a disease which first grew
to a national pestilence in the 17th century, and which, in the kind
and manner of its infecting power, approaches nearest to the sweating
fever. To this latter category the English Sweating Sickness likewise
belongs; a disease altogether of a temporary character, which, after
its cessation, left no infecting material behind, and consequently was
incapable of propagating itself after the manner of those diseases
which are completely contagious. The animal matters, which were
expelled along with the profuse perspiration, and spread so horrible a
stench around the sick, contained amid their alkaline salts, (probably
ammonia in various states of combination,) and their superabundant
acid, the ferment of the disease; and this penetrated into the
lungs of the bystanders as they breathed, and provided they were but
predisposed for its reception, as above stated, continually produced
it. It may be considered as certain that mere manual contact was not
sufficient to communicate the infection, and that this was propagated,
either by the pestilential atmosphere which surrounded the beds of the
sick, or by exhalations generated in unclean situations where there was
no vent for their escape. On this account it was that the residence at
common inns and public-houses was looked upon as dangerous[471].

I would not, however, be understood to maintain that, during the
three epidemics with which, up to the present stage of our inquiry,
we have become acquainted, the spread of the sweating fever alone
was occasioned by infection; for if the general epidemic causes
were powerful enough to excite the disease, without any previously
existing poison, why might they not produce the same effect still more
independently throughout the course of the pestilence, since, as is
the case in all epidemics, those causes in all probability continued
to increase in intensity? That the plague grew worse on the occasion
of any great assemblages of the people, was at that time known, and
the notion of contagion thence very naturally arose. Yet, must it
here be taken into account, that even without this notion, and merely
from the assemblage itself of many people in whom the like malady
was germinating, and already had shewn tokens of its approach, that
approach might easily be accelerated, and the disease increased among
those merely slightly indisposed, by the reciprocal communication of
morbid exhalations. For as the predisposition to any malady, which
is an intermediate condition between that malady and the previous
state of good health[472], plainly displays the properties of the
disease in those whom it _threatens_ to attack, so these exhalations
(or epidemic causes which give rise to Sweating Sickness in the first
instance) certainly differ from those which occur in a sweating
sickness which has already broken out, only in unessential respects,
and might consequently stimulate the mere disposition to the disease
more and more, even to the actual eruption of the disease itself.
Yet a contagion was likewise in operation at the same time which was
destructive even to the temperate, and to those who were apparently
in health, nay, even to foreigners, who were living in an English
atmosphere and on English food, as the example of the Italian Ammonius
plainly proves[473].

In all epidemics which increase to such a degree as to become
contagious, it is of importance to distinguish which of these causes
are the more powerful, the predisposing or epidemic causes, which
originate the proneness to the disease, or the proximate causes, among
which, in the generality of cases, contagion is the most prominent. The
predisposing were here evidently the more operative; contagion was not
added till the disease was at its height, and although it contributed
not a little to its spread, yet it always remained subordinate to
the other sources of the disease, and all the matter of infection
vanished without a trace, on the cessation of the disorder, so that the
subsequent eruptions of it were always produced by the renewal of those
general causes which are in operation upon and under the earth. It is,
however, as little within the compass of human knowledge to discover
the essential foundation of this renewal, as the proximate causes of
the appearance of the mould spots at the commencement of the sixteenth
century, or any other of those processes which are prepared and brought
into activity by the hidden powers of nature.



Several epidemics thus originating in causes beyond human comprehension
appeared in the 16th century. Among the most remarkable was a violent
and extensive catarrhal fever in 1510, of that kind which the Italians
call Influenza, thus recognising an inscrutable influence which affects
numberless persons at the same time. It prevailed principally in
France, but probably also over the rest of Europe, of which, however,
the accounts do not inform us, for in those times they took little
pains to record the particulars of epidemics which were not of a
character to affect life. According to recent experience we should be
warranted even in supposing that this malady had its origin in the
remotest parts of the East. During the whole of the winter, which was
very cold, violent storms of wind prevailed, and the north and middle
of Italy were shaken by frequent earthquakes; whereupon there followed
so general a sickness in France, that we are assured by the historians
that few of the inhabitants escaped it. The catarrhal symptoms,
which on the appearance of disorders of this kind usually form their
commencement, seem to have been quite thrown into the background by
those of violent rheumatism and inflammation. The patient was first
seized with giddiness and severe headache; then came on a shooting
pain through the shoulders, and extending to the thighs. The loins
too were affected with intolerably painful dartings, during which
an inflammatory fever set in with delirium and violent excitement.
In some the parotid glands became inflamed, and even the digestive
organs participated in the deep-rooted malady; for those affected had,
together with constant oppression at the stomach, a great loathing for
all animal food, and a dislike even to wine. Among the poor as well as
the rich many died, and some quite suddenly, of this strange disease,
in the treatment of which the physicians shortened life not a little by
their purgative treatment and phlebotomy, seeking an excuse for their
ignorance in the influence of the constellations, and alleging that
astral diseases were beyond the reach of human art[474].

From this prejudicial effect of our chief antiphlogistic remedy,
bleeding, as well as of evacuations from the bowels, we may conclude
that the disease, though in its commencement rheumatic, yet had an
essential tendency to produce relaxation and debility of the nerves,
and in this respect, as well as in its extension to all classes,
accorded with the modern influenzas, in which the same phenomena have
manifested themselves only much less vividly and plainly. The French,
who, from the levity of their character, have always called serious
things by jocose names, designate this disease “Coqueluche” (the monk’s
hood), because, owing to the extreme sensibility of the skin to cold
and currents of air, this kind of hood was generally necessary, and
was a protection against an attack of the malady, as well as against
its increase. That in the accounts, which are, to be sure, very
incomplete, there should be no express mention of any affection of the
air-passages, is remarkable, since this could not in all likelihood
have failed to exist; although it might perhaps have been only slightly
manifested. Nearly a century before (1414), this affection appeared
far more prominently on the occurrence of a no less general disorder
of the same kind; so that all those who had the complaint, suffered
from a considerable hoarseness, and all public business in Paris
was interrupted on this account[475]. It was on that very occasion
that the name Coqueluche was first employed, and this having, as is
well known, been transferred to the whooping-cough, it is easier to
suppose, with respect to the influenza of 1510, which was similarly
named, an omission in the account, than the real absence of a symptom
so very generally prevalent; for in these kinds of comparisons and
denominations, the common sense of the people errs much less than the
learned profundity of political historians.

We must not omit here to remark that three years before (1411), and
thirteen years afterwards, two diseases entirely similar and equally
general, made their appearance in France, of which we nowhere find that
any notice has been taken up to the present time. The first was called
_Tac_, the second _Ladendo_, which designations have since entirely
gone out of use. Both were accompanied by very severe cough, so that
in the former, ruptures not unfrequently occurred, and pregnant women
were in consequence prematurely confined, and by the latter, from
its universality, the public worship was disturbed. In the ladendo,
there seems to have been an affection of the kidney of an inflammatory
character, and much more severe than in the coqueluche of 1510, a
memorable example of epidemic influence, and without a parallel in
modern times. This pain in the kidneys, which was as severe as a
fit of the stone, was followed by fever with loss of appetite, and
an incessant cough that terminated in disagreeable eruptions about
the mouth and nose. The disorder ran a course of about fifteen days,
and was generally prevalent throughout October, being unattended
with danger, notwithstanding the severity of its symptoms. One might
almost be tempted to regard the tac of 1411 as the coqueluche of 1414,
which is only slightly alluded to by Mezeray, and whereof the author
from whom we are now quoting, has made no mention; for a false date
might easily occur here. Yet this must remain undecided until we can
obtain fuller information, for we have experienced, even in the most
recent times, an example of influenzas (1831 and 1833) following each
other in quick succession. Gastric symptoms and an inordinate degree
of irritability accompanied the spasmodic cough, and the complaint
terminated with evacuations of blood. However, the disease was
unattended with danger, and lasted upon the whole only three weeks[476].

Four other epidemics similar to that of 1510 appeared in the sixteenth
century, two which were quite general in the years 1557 and 1580, and
two less extensively prevalent in the years 1551 and 1564[477]. Of
the two former we possess accurate descriptions; it will therefore
aid us in forming a correct judgment respecting the influenza
of 1510, if we here take a review of these also, since the most
experienced contemporaries classed all these disorders together as of
a similar kind. During the dry unfavourable summer of 1557, invalids
were suddenly seized with hoarseness and oppression at the chest,
accompanied with a pressure on the head, and followed by shivering and
such a violent cough, that they thought they should be suffocated,
especially during the night. This cough was dry at first, but about the
seventh day, or even later, an abundant secretion took place either
of thick mucus or of thin frothy fluid. Upon this the cough somewhat
abated, and the breathing became freer. During the whole course of
the disorder, however, patients complained of insufferable languor,
loss of strength, want of appetite and even nausea at the sight of
food, restlessness and want of sleep. The malady ended in most cases
in abundant perspiration, but occasionally in diarrhœa. Rich and
poor, people of every occupation and of all ages, were seized with
this disease in whole crowds simultaneously, and it passed easily
from a single case to a whole household. On this occasion death
rarely occurred, except in children who had not power to endure the
severity of the cough, and medicine was of little avail, either in
alleviating the disorder or arresting its destructive course. The
already established name of this disease was immediately called to
mind again in France. It was not, however, confined to that kingdom,
but prevailed as generally, with some considerable varieties of form,
in Italy, Germany, Holland, and doubtless over a still wider range of
country[478]. The same was the case with the influenza of 1580, which
spread over the whole of Europe, and seems to have been less severe;
thus bearing a closer resemblance[479] to that of 1831 and 1833,
which is still in the recollection of most of our readers from their
own experience. A more elaborate research into this very important
subject would far surpass the limits of this treatise, for phenomena
deeply affecting the whole system of human collective life are here
to be considered, which can only become apparent when received as a
connected whole, yet we must at least point out the relation which the
influenzas bear to the greater epidemics. This is quite apparent; for
as catarrhs are not unfrequently the forerunners, accompaniments or
sequelæ of important diseases in individual cases[480], excitement of
the mucous membrane being often merely an outward sign of more deeply
seated commotion, so also are influenzas usually only the _first
manifestations, but sometimes also the last remains of extensive
epidemics_. The most recent example is still fresh in our memories. The
influenza of 1831 was immediately followed by the Indian cholera, and
scarcely had this, after its revival in Eastern and central Europe,
vanished, when the influenza of 1833 appeared, as if to announce a
general peace. After the influenza of 1510, a plague followed in
the north of Europe, which in Denmark carried off the son of King
John[481]; 1551 was the year of the fifth epidemic sweating sickness.
In 1557, the influenza in Holland, was followed by a bubo plague, which
lasted the following year, and carried off 5000 of the inhabitants at
Delft[482]. In 1564, a very destructive plague raged in Spain, of which
10,000 people died at Barcelona, and finally, in 1580, the last year
of influenza in that century, a plague of which 40,000 died in Paris,
appeared over the greater part of Europe and in Egypt[483].



We now revert to the year 1517, and shall consider the epidemics
which accompanied the English sweating sickness. First of all, the
_Hauptkrankheit_, that brain fever which so often recurred in the
central parts of Europe, appeared extensively throughout Germany. Many
died of this dangerous disease, and we are assured by contemporaries
that other inter-current inflammatory fevers were also very fatal[484].
Such was the case in Germany, the heart of Europe. Another disease,
however, much more important, and till that time wholly unknown to
medical men, appeared in Holland, which broke out in January, 1517,
and from its dangerous and quite inexplicable symptoms, spread fear
and horror around. It was a malignant, and, according to the assurance
of a very respectable medical eye-witness, an infectious inflammation
of the throat, so rapid in its course that, unless assistance were
procured within the first eight hours, the patient was past all hope
of recovery before the close of the day. Sudden pains in the throat,
and violent oppression of the chest, especially in the region of the
heart, threatened suffocation, and at length actually produced it.
During the paroxysms the muscles of the throat and chest were seized
with violent spasm, and there were but short intervals of alleviation
before a repetition of such seizures terminated in death. Unattended
by any premonitory symptoms, the disease began with a severe catarrhal
affection of the chest, which speedily advanced to inflammation of the
air passages, and where death did not occur on the day of the attack,
ran on to a dangerous inflammation of the lungs, which followed the
usual course, but was accompanied by a very high fever. Occasionally
a less perilous transition into intermittent fever was observed, but
in no case did a sudden recovery take place; for even when the fever
subsided, the patient continued to suffer, for at least a month, from
pain in the stomach and great debility, which symptoms admit of easy
explanation to a medical man of the present day, from the fissures and
small ulcers of the tongue, which appeared when the fever was at its
height, and obstinately resisted the usual treatment.

The remedies employed shew the circumspection and ability of the Dutch
physicians. They had recourse, as soon as possible, at the latest
within six hours, to venesection, and followed this up immediately
by purgatives, of which, however, some eminent men disapproved,
and this to the great detriment of their patients, for without the
combined effect of both these means, the sudden suffocation could not
be averted. Moreover, the employment of detergent gargles, whereby
the extension of the affection to the lungs was prevented, as also
of demulcent pectoral remedies, was decidedly beneficial, and it is
affirmed that all who were thus treated were easily restored[485].

Extraordinary and peculiar as this disease, for which contemporaries
found no name, was, its rapid onset and its sudden disappearance were
still more so. Most of those affected were taken ill at the same time,
and eleven days of suffering and misery had scarcely elapsed when not
another case occurred; the numbers who had fallen victims were buried;
and but for the journal of the worthy Tyengius[486], no distinct
record would have existed of this remarkable epidemic, which however,
it is certain, spread further than merely over the misty territory of
Holland, and apparently with still greater malignity; for in the same
year we find it in Basle, where, within the space of eight months, it
destroyed about 2000 people, and its symptoms would seem to have been
still more strongly marked. Respecting the intermediate countries,
which it is highly probable that the disease passed through from
Holland before it reached Basle, we unfortunately have no information.
The tongue and gullet were white as if covered with mould, the patient
had an aversion to food and drink, and suffered from malignant fever,
accompanied with continued headache and delirium. Here also, in
addition to an internal method of cure which has not been particularly
detailed, the cleansing of the mouth was perceived to be an essential
part of the treatment: the viscous white coating was removed every two
hours, and the tongue and fauces were afterwards smeared with honey of
roses[487], whereby patients were restored more easily than when this
precaution was omitted[488].

It appears, according to modern experience, to admit of no doubt that
this disease consisted of an inflammation of the mucous membrane which,
accompanied by a secretion of lymph, spread from the œsophagus to the
stomach, and likewise through the air passages to the lungs, being
thus identical with pharyngeal croup, which was represented a few
years ago as a new disease, and has in consequence been designated by
a special name[489]. Its subsequent appearance in the memorable year
1557, respecting which we have a still more complete account, gives
additional weight to this supposition. In that year it broke out in
October, and was observed by Forest, who was himself the subject of
it, at Alkmaar, where it attacked whole families, and in the course of
a few weeks destroyed more than 200 people. It was not, however, so
excessively rapid in its course as in 1517, but began with a slight
fever like a common catarrh, and shewed its great malignity only by
degrees. Sudden fits of suffocation then came on, and the pain of the
chest was so dreadfully distressing that the sufferers imagined they
must die in the paroxysm. The complaint was increased still more by
a tight convulsive cough, and until this was relieved by a secretion
of mucus, proved dangerous, especially to pregnant women, sixteen of
whom died within the space of eight days, whilst those who survived
were all prematurely brought to bed. The fever which accompanied the
inflammation was very various in its course. It was rarely observed
to continue without intermission, but where this was the case, was
attended with the greatest peril. Yet death did not take place on this
visitation until the ninth or fourteenth day, whereas in the year 1517
as many hours would have sufficed to produce a fatal termination.
After this period the danger diminished, and those patients were most
secure from suffocation, provided they had good medical attendance,
whose complaint had been accompanied throughout its course by fever
of only an intermittent character. So marked was the influence of the
Dutch soil, that until this intermittent passed into continued fever
of different gradations, it appeared of the purest and most unmixed
type. In these cases the inflammation was less completely formed, so
that even bleeding, a remedy otherwise indispensable, was sometimes
unnecessary. Those affected all suffered most at night and in the
morning, the latter generally bringing with it the inflammation of
the larynx and trachea, which, however, they had not at that time
experience enough to recognise as such, perceiving as they did only
a slight redness in the fauces. The painful affection of the stomach
was also in this epidemic very distinctly marked, so that a sense of
pressure at the præcordia, accompanied by continual acid eructations,
continued to exist even after a succession of six or seven fits of
fever; and convalescents were troubled for a long time with dyspepsia,
debility and hypochondriasis. The inflammation of the mucous membrane,
no doubt, affected the nervous plexuses of the abdomen, as is usually
the case, and totally changed the secretion. This was proved by the
treatment, for, by administering the necessary purgative remedies, a
vast quantity of offensive mucus, mixed with bile, was evacuated.

Our excellent eye-witness assures us that the people sickened as
suddenly as if they had inhaled a poisonous blast, so that more than a
thousand people in Alkmaar betook themselves to their beds in a single
day, a thick stinking mist having previously for several days spread
over the land. This pestilence did not terminate so speedily as that of
the year 1517; on the contrary, it delayed until the winter, and seems
to have formed the conclusion of a whole series of morbid phenomena,
particularly of the already mentioned influenza throughout Europe, and
of the bubo plague in Holland, which had occurred in the middle of
the summer,—phenomena that were accompanied by the usual attendants
of epidemics, namely great scarcity, and unusual occurrences in the
atmosphere, such, for instance, as electric illuminations of prominent
objects, and so forth[490].

The close connexion between this inflammation of the air-passages
and gullet and the epidemic catarrh is quite apparent; for these
are but gradations and gradual transitions in the affection of the
mucous membrane, as also in the power of atmospherical causes, which
especially influence the organs of respiration. We believe, therefore,
that we are fully justified in classing the epidemic described to have
taken place in Holland and Germany in 1517, with the influenzas; and
in declaring the morbid commotion in human collective life which thus
manifested itself, to have been a forerunner of the English pestilence,
which was simultaneously prepared by the altered condition of the
atmosphere, and broke out a few months later.

We ought not to omit here to mention that, in this same year, 1517, the
small-pox, and with it, as field-poppies among corn, the measles, was
conveyed by Europeans to Hispaniola, and committed dreadful ravages at
that time, as afterwards, among the unfortunate inhabitants. Whether
the eruption of these infectious diseases in the new world was favoured
by an epidemic influence or not, can no longer be ascertained; yet the
affirmative seems probable from the fact, that the small-pox did not
commit its greatest ravages in Hispaniola[491] until the following
year, and, according to recent experience, those epidemic influences
which extend from Europe westward, always require some time to reach
the eastern coasts of America.

But even without this phenomenon in the New World, which is now for the
first time placed within the pale of observations on epidemics, we have
facts at hand sufficiently numerous and worthy of credit to prove—_that
the English Sweating Sickness of 1517, made its appearance, not alone,
but surrounded by a whole group of epidemics, and that these were
called forth by general morbific influences of an unknown nature_.





           THE FOURTH VISITATION OF THE DISEASE.—1528, 1529.

    “Und wenn die Welt voll Teufel wär’,
     Und wollten uns verschlingen;
     So fürchten wir uns nicht so sehr,
     Es soll uns doch gelingen!”—LUTHER.



The events to which we are now about to allude, demonstrate, by their
surprising course, that the fate of nations is at times far more
dependent on the laws of physical life than on the will of potentates
or the collective efforts of human action, and that these prove utterly
impotent when opposed to the unfettered powers of nature. These powers,
inscrutable in their dominion, destructive in their effects, stay the
course of events, baffle the grandest plans, paralyse the boldest
flights of the mind, and when victory seemed within their grasp, have
often annihilated embattled hosts with the flaming sword of the angel
of death.

To obliterate the disgrace of Pavia[492], Francis I. in league with
England, Switzerland, Rome, Genoa and Venice against the too powerful
Emperor of Germany, sent a fine army into Italy. The emperor’s troops
gave way wherever the French plumes appeared, and victory seemed
faithful only to the banners of France and to the military experience
of a tried leader[493]. Every thing promised a glorious issue; Naples
alone, weakly defended by German lansquenets and Spaniards[494],
remained still to be vanquished. The siege was opened on the 1st of
May, 1528, and the general confidently pledged his honour for the
conquest of this strong city, which had once been so destructive to the
French[495]. It was easy with an army of 30,000 veteran warriors[496]
to overpower the imperialists; and a small body of English[497] seemed
to have come merely to partake in the festivals after the expected
victory. The city too suffered from a scarcity, for it was blockaded
by Doria, with his Genoese galleys; and water, fit to drink, failed
after Lautrec had turned off the aqueducts of Poggio reale; so that the
plague, which had never entirely ceased among the Germans since the
sacking of Rome[498], began to spread.

But amidst this confidence in the success of the French arms, the means
for ensuring it were gradually neglected. The valour of the intrepid
and prudent commander was doubtless equal to the minor vicissitudes
of war, but whilst the length of the delay paralysed his activity,
nature herself suddenly proved fatal to this hitherto victorious army:
pestilences began to rage among the troops, and human courage could
no longer withstand the “far-shooting arrows of the god of day.” The
consequence was, that within the space of seven weeks, out of the whole
host which up to that period had been eager for combat, a mere handful
remained, consisting of a few thousands of cadaverous figures, who were
almost incapable of bearing arms or of following the commands of their
sick leaders. On the 29th of August the siege was raised, fifteen
days after the heroic Lautrec, bowed down by chagrin and disease, had
resigned his breath; the wreck of the army retreated amid thunder and
heavy rain[499], and were soon captured by the imperialists, so that
but few of them ever saw their native land again.

This siege brought still greater misery upon France than even the fatal
battle of Pavia, for about 5000 of the French nobility, some from the
most distinguished families, had perished under the walls of Naples;
its remoter consequences too were humiliating to the king, and the
people; since owing to its failure all those hitherto feasible schemes
were blighted, which had for their object the establishment of French
dominion beyond the Alps. It behoves us, therefore, to pay so much the
more attention to those essential causes of this event, which fall
within the province of medical research.

The mortality which occurred in the camp, began probably as early as
June, after the usual calamities which surround an army in an enemy’s
country. The French and Swiss were insatiable in their indulgence in
fruit, which the gardens and fields furnished them in abundance, whilst
there was a scarcity of bread and of other proper food[500]. Hence
fevers soon broke out, which increased in malignity the longer they
existed, accompanied no doubt by debilitating diarrhœas, which never
fail to make their appearance under circumstances of this kind, and are
in themselves among the most pernicious of camp diseases, since they
not only destroy in the individual case by the exhaustion which they
occasion, but likewise by infecting the air, prepare the way for the
worst pestilences.

These diseases were, however, little noticed, and there was
consequently no attempt made to diminish their causes. It became daily
more and more apparent, that the cutting off of the sources near Poggio
reale, which Lautrec had commanded, in order to compel the besieged
to a more speedy surrender, was in the highest degree injurious to
the besiegers themselves; for the water, having now no outlet, spread
over the plain where the camp was situated, which it converted into a
swamp, whence it rose, morning and evening, in the form of thick fogs.
From this cause, and while a southerly wind continued to prevail, the
sickness soon became general. Those soldiers, who were not already
confined to bed in their tents, were seen with pallid visages, swelled
legs, and bloated bellies, scarcely able to crawl; so that, weary
of nightly watching, they were often plundered by the marauding
Neapolitans. The great mortality did not commence until about the 15th
of July, but so dreadful was its ravages, that about three weeks were
sufficient to complete the almost entire destruction of the army[501].
Around and within the tents vacated by the death of their inmates,
noxious weeds sprang up. Thousands perished without help, either in
a state of stupor, or in the raving delirium of fever[502]. In the
entrenchments, in the tents, and wherever death had overtaken his
victims, there unburied corpses lay, and the dead that were interred,
swollen with putridity, burst their shallow graves, and spread a
poisonous stench far and wide over the camp. There was no longer any
thought of order or military discipline, and many of the commanders and
captains were either sick themselves, or had fled to the neighbouring
towns, in order to avoid the contagion[503].

The glory of the French arms was departed, and her proud banners
cowered beneath an unhallowed spectre. Meanwhile the pestilence broke
out among the Venetian galleys under Pietro Lando. Doria had already
gone over to the Emperor[504], and thus was this expedition, begun
under the most favourable auspices, frustrated on every side by the
malignant influence of the season.

No medical contemporary has described the nature of this violent
disease, and historians have on this point preserved only general
outlines, which do not afford sufficient materials to ground an
investigation. Certain it is, that in the year 1528, a very malignant
_petechial fever_ extended throughout Italy, and in the proper
sense of the word prevailed so decidedly, that it even followed the
Italians abroad in the same way as the Sweating Sickness did the
English, as is proved by the case of the learned Venetian Naugerio,
who, being dispatched on an embassy to Francis the 1st, died at
Blois on the Loire, of this very disease, with which the French
had yet no acquaintance[505]. Contemporaries assure us, that this
epidemic committed great ravages in the country, already distracted
by wars and feuds, and it is therefore hardly to be doubted, that,
occurring as it did in those same years, it was the disease of
which we have been treating, the malignity of which was increased
on extraordinary occasions. A pestilence which, just before the
siege of Naples, destroyed one-third of the inhabitants of Cremona,
was in all probability the petechial fever[506]. Yet, here and
there, the old bubo plague made its appearance. This it was which
in the year 1524 carried off 50,000 people in Milan[507], and this
appears likewise to have been the disease which, after the sacking
of Rome, broke out among the German lansquenets, and in a short time
annihilated two-thirds of these troops. Contemporaries saw therein
God’s just punishment of their desecration of the Holy See, for in the
succeeding years, all the remaining participators in the storming of
the eternal city, also met with an end worthy of their crimes[508].
They did not take into account, however, the beastly intemperance
and excesses of the soldiery, whose eagerness after plunder led them
to encounter the plague poison in the most secret holes and corners;
nor did they reflect, that the plague penetrated the Castle of St.
Angelo itself, and destroyed some of the courtiers almost under the
eyes of the Pope[509]. Of these lansquenets, many went to Naples in
the following year under the Prince of Orange, and it may with good
ground be supposed, that they took with them to that city fresh germs
of plague; to which may be added, the by no means incredible story,
that the besieged sent infected and sick soldiers to the French, in
order to cause poisonous pestilences to break out among them[510].
This very circumstance tells in favour of bubo plague, for the decided
certainty of its contagious nature was known, and seemed beyond all
comparison greater than the more conditional communicability of the
new disease[511]. Moreover, the same attempt at impestation had been
already often made in earlier times.

It is, however, also to be considered, on the other side, that the
French army was more exposed to the epidemic influence of the air, the
water, and the general powers of nature, than any other assemblage
of men, and, that this influence was probably more powerful in the
year 1529, than at any other time during the sixteenth century. The
formation of fog in the heat of summer is at all times an extraordinary
phenomenon[512], which decidedly indicates a disproportion in the
mutual action of the components and powers of the lower strata of the
atmosphere. This was not dependent merely on the local peculiarities
of Naples, for during the summer of 1528, grey fogs were observed
throughout Italy, which rendered the unwholesome quality of the air
visible to the eye[513]. This was increased by the prevalence of
southerly winds, which are always, in Italy, prejudicial to health,
as also by the thousand privations of a camp, so that a disease which
was already prevalent all over Italy,—we allude to the _petechial
fever_,—might well break out on the damp soil of Poggio reale. In the
history of national diseases, we find a moral proof of the predominance
of epidemic influence which plainly and intelligibly manifests itself
under the greatest variety of circumstances. This is a belief, that the
water, and even the air is poisoned[514]. Nor is this proof wanting
in the deplorable history of the French army before Naples, for it
was generally believed, that some Spaniards of Moorish descent, to
whom was attributed an especial degree of skill in the management of
poison, and some Jews from Germany, who, for the sake of gain, had
followed the lansquenets to truckle for their booty, had stolen out
of the city under cover of the night, in order to poison the water
in the neighbourhood of the camp[515]. It was also surmised, that
an Italian apothecary had administered to the French knights poison
in their medicine[516]. We will not anticipate on this occasion the
researches of naturalists, whose experiments on air and water, during
important epidemics, have not yet led to any results; it is, however,
not improbable that pond and spring water, under such circumstances as
are here described to have occurred, might become impregnated with a
noxious quality not inherent in it, which would very naturally give
rise to the belief that a poison had been thrown into it. On the whole,
this accusation may certainly be judged according to the same views
which have been stated in our treatise on the Black Death.

From all these circumstances, the notion is highly probable that it
was the petechial fever which raged in the French camp; and if we may
attach any importance to the incidental accounts of historians, it may
perhaps be to the purpose to state that Prudencio de Sandoval, who has
written from authentic materials, calls the disease “las bubas.”[517]
This name, it is true, presupposes a rather strange confusion of
petechial fever with lues; and, indeed, the diseases among the French
troops from 1495 to 1528, have been oddly jumbled together by Sandoval.
It shews, however, that there still existed a recollection of the
prevalent eruptions which occurred in the pestilence of 1528; and,
therefore, this whole account might perhaps be the more justly applied
to petechial fever, as this same historian states, that the French
called the disease after the village of Poggio reale “les Poches,”[518]
by which name the well known bubo plague would hardly have been
designated. If, however, we choose to suppose that at one and the same
time _different diseases_ prevailed in the French army, this notion is
not only supported by the express testimony of a contemporary[519], but
also by many observations ancient and modern[520], that have been made
in cases where the circumstances have been similar to those which then
prevailed. It is ever to be regretted that there was no intelligent
Machaon to be found in the camp before Naples; such a one would
undoubtedly have left us some pithy observations on the combination and
affinity of petechial fever and bubo plague.



Deeply as the irreparable loss of such an army was felt by the French,
yet were they destined to suffer still greater misfortunes at home.
The dark power which threatened all Europe regarded neither distance
nor limits. It seized on the French nation in their own country whilst
their military youth were destroyed before Naples. The cold spring
and wet summer of 1528 destroyed the growing corn[521], and a famine
was thus produced throughout France, even more grievous, on account
of its duration, than the period of scarcity in the time of Louis the
XIth[522], for the failure of the harvest continued for five years
in succession, during which all order of the seasons seemed to have
ceased. A damp summer heat prevailed in autumn and winter, a frost of
a single day only occasionally intervening. The summer, on the other
hand, was cloudy, damp, and ungenial. The length of the days alone
distinguished one month from another. It appears plainly from detached
accounts how much the usual course of vegetation was disturbed.
Scarcely had the fruit trees shed their leaves in the autumn when they
began to bud again, and to bear fruitless blossoms. No returns rewarded
the toil of the husbandman, and the longed-for harvest again and again
deceived the hopes of the people. Thus, even during the first of these
calamitous years, the distress became general, and the increasing
indigence was no longer to be checked by human aid. Bands of beggars
wandered over the country in lamentable procession. The bonds of civil
order became more and more relaxed, and people soon had to fear not
only robbery and plunder on the part of these unfortunate beings, but
the contagion of a pestilence, the offspring of their distress, which
followed in their train.

This disease was a new production of the French soil, and when it
spread generally throughout the country, was the more sensibly felt,
as it especially carried off young and robust men; on which account it
was designated by the very significant name of Trousse-Galant[523].
It consisted of a highly inflammatory fever, which destroyed its
victims in a very short time, even within the space of a few hours;
or, if they escaped with their lives, deprived them of their hair
and nails, and from a long-continued disinclination for all animal
food, left behind it, as sequelæ, a protracted debility and diseases
which endangered the recovery of the sick, whose constitutions were
already so much shaken. Hence it appears that this fever was combined
with a great decomposition of the fluids, and a very morbid condition
of the functions of the bowels, not to mention the effects produced
by continued hunger, which contemporaries paint in the most dreadful
colours.

The stock of provisions was already so far consumed in the first year
that people made bread of acorns, and sought with avidity all kinds of
harmless roots, merely to appease hunger. These miserable sufferers
wandered about, houseless and more like corpses than living beings, and
finally, failing even to excite commiseration, perished on dunghills
or in out-houses. The larger towns shut their gates against them, and
the various charitable institutions proved, of necessity, insufficient
to afford relief in this frightful extremity! It was the lot of very
few to obtain the tender care and attendance of the Sisters of Charity.
In most of those affected their livid swollen countenances, and the
dropsical swelling of their limbs, betrayed the sickly condition in
which they dragged on their languishing existence. Every one fled from
these pestiferous spectres, for they were saturated with the poison of
this deadly disease, and the remark was no doubt made a thousand times
over, that this poison might be conveyed to persons in health without
affecting the carrier, since want and ill health occasionally afford a
miserable protection against disease of this kind[524].

The necessary data for furnishing a complete account of the
Trousse-galant of 1528 do not exist, for physicians passed over this
epidemic with the same coolness and indifference which unfortunately
they may be justly accused of having shewn with respect to other
important phenomena. But it returned once again in 1545–46, appearing
in Savoy and over a great part of France; and we possess from
Paré[525], and from Sander, a Flemish physician[526], though still a
defective, yet a more satisfactory description of its symptoms on this
occasion. Its course was, as before, very rapid, so that it destroyed
the patient in two or three days; again it attacked the strong rather
than the weak, as if in justification of its old name, and those who
recovered remained for a long time distinguishable by the loss of their
hair and their wretched appearance. Patients felt at the commencement
an insufferable weight in the body, with extremely violent headache,
which soon deprived them of all consciousness and passed into a
profound stupor, even the sphincter muscles losing their power. In
other cases a continued state of sleeplessness was followed by feverish
delirium, so violent that it was necessary to have recourse to means
of restraint. Such opposite states are usual in all typhous fevers.
_Sander_ expressly mentions that in most of those affected, eruptions
made their appearance. He does not, however, state their nature or
describe the course and crisis of the disease otherwise than that it
terminated about the fourth or the eleventh day. Even the eruptions
that did appear, which were probably petechiæ, and perhaps also (rother
friesel) red miliary vesicles, came at an indefinite period; either
at the commencement, when they afforded an unfavourable prognosis,
or later, when they betokened a favourable crisis. Thread-worms, in
great numbers, were evacuated alive under great torment, and generally
increased the sufferings of the patient. The disease was scarcely less
contagious than plague, and with respect to its treatment, bleeding,
copious and even ad deliquium, was decidedly successful, which coupled
with the attacks on the head just described[527], leads to the
conclusion that there existed a fulness of blood and an inflammatory
state of circulation, together, perhaps, with inflammation of the
brain. We must not omit to observe that, during the pestilence of 1546,
the bubo plague made its appearance here and there, especially in the
Netherlands[528]; and in the following year, broke out and spread to a
greater extent in France[529], whence it seems to follow, with respect
to the malady of which we are now treating, that its nature resembled
the petechial fever, since that disease usually precedes the occurrence
of pestilences[530].

The assertion of historians, that in 1528, and the following years,
France lost a fourth part of her inhabitants by famine and pestilence,
seems, according to our representation, not to be by any means
exaggerated. The consequences, as regarded the future destinies of that
country, were likewise very important. For Francis the 1st saw that no
new sacrifices could be borne by his people, who were already so sorely
afflicted; and therefore abandoned his schemes of greatness and foreign
power, consenting, on the 5th of August, 1529, to the disadvantageous
treaty of Cambray.



Whoever, following the above facts, will represent to himself the
state of Europe in 1528, will readily believe, that a poisonous
atmosphere enveloped this quarter of the globe, and continually brought
destruction and death over its nations. Ruin broke in upon them in a
thousand forms, destroying their bodies and benighting their minds, and
if to this we add the discord and the deadly party hatred which at that
time prevailed in the world, it seems as if every circumstance that
could affect mankind was implicated in this gigantic conflict, which
threatened in its fatal result to annihilate all traces of the times
that were past.

A heavier affliction than has yet been described was in store for
England: for in the latter end of May, the Sweating Fever broke out
there in the midst of the most populous part of the capital, spreading
rapidly over the whole kingdom; and fourteen months later, brought
a scene of horror upon all the nations of northern Europe, scarcely
equalled during any other epidemic. It appeared at once with the same
intensity as it had shewn eleven years before, was ushered in by no
previous indications, and between health and death there lay but a
brief term of five or six hours. Public business was postponed: the
courts were closed, and four weeks after the pestilence broke out,
the festival of St. John[531] was stopped, to the great sorrow of the
people, who certainly would not have dispensed with its celebration
had they recovered from the consternation arising from the great
mortality. The king’s court was again deserted, and to the various
passions and mental emotions which had been clashing there since
the year 1517, as, for instance, those arising from the theological
zeal which had been excited by Henry VIIIth’s defence of the faith,
was added once more the old alarm and distress, which seemed to be
justified by the death of some favoured courtiers; particularly of two
chamberlains[532], and of Sir Francis Poynes, who had just returned
from an embassy to Spain. The king left London immediately, and
endeavoured to avoid the epidemic by continually travelling, until at
last he grew tired of so unsettled a life, and determined to await his
destiny at Tytynhangar. Here, with his first wife and a few confidents,
he resided quietly, apart from the world, surrounded by fires for
the purification of the air, and guarded by the precautions of his
physician, who had the satisfaction to find that the pestilence kept
aloof from this lonely residence[533].

How many lives were lost in this, which some historians have called
_the great mortality_, can be estimated only by the facts which
have been stated, and which betoken an uncommonly violent degree of
agitation in men’s minds. Accurate data are altogether wanting, yet
it is quite evident that the whole English nation, from the monarch
to the meanest peasant, was impressed with a feeling of alarm at the
uncertainty of life, to which neither the rude state of society, nor a
constant familiarity with the effects of laws written in blood[534],
had blunted their sensibility. Such a state does not exist without
very numerous cases of mortality which bring the danger home to
every individual, so that it is to be presumed that the churchyards
were everywhere abundantly filled. Nor did this destructive epidemic
come alone. Provisions were scarce and dear, and whilst hundreds of
thousands lay stretched upon the bed of death, many perished with
hunger[535], and the same scenes would have been experienced as in
France, had not the corn trade afforded some relief[536].

As soon as the occurrences of this unfortunate year could be more
closely surveyed, a conviction was at once felt, that _it was one and
the same general cause of disease which called forth the poisonous
pestilence in the French camp before Naples, the putrid fever among
the youth in France, and the sweating sickness in England, and that
the varying nature of these diseases depended only on the conditions
of the soil and the qualities of the atmosphere in the countries which
were visited_[537]. If, in opposition to these notions, a narrow view
of human life in the aggregate should raise a doubt, this would be
strikingly refuted by the wonderful coincidence, in point of time,
of all these phenomena, occurring in such various parts of Europe;
for while the French army, after an exposure of four weeks to the
miseries and poisonous vapours of its camp before Naples, perceived
the first forebodings of its destruction, the great famine with the
Trousse-galant in its train was in full advance on the other side the
Alps, and almost on the same day the Sweating Sickness broke out upon
the Thames.



The chronicles of all the nations of Europe are full of remarkable
notices respecting the commotions of nature in these particular years,
which were so utterly hostile to the animal and vegetable kingdoms. In
England the period of distress was already approaching; towards the end
of the year 1527. Throughout the whole winter, (November and December,
1527, and January, 1528,) heavy rains deluged the country, the rivers
overflowed their banks, and the winter seed was thus rotted. The
weather then remained dry until April; but scarcely was the summer seed
sown, when the rain again set in, and continued day and night for full
eight weeks, so that the last hope of a harvest was now destroyed[538],
and the soaked earth, in the thick mists that arose from its surface,
hatched the well known demon of the Sweating Disease. It was now of no
avail that the torrents of rain ceased, for the softened soil gave the
pestilence constant nourishment, and the damp warmth which, alternating
with unseasonable cold, remained prevalent during the following years
all over Europe, rendered men’s bodies more and more susceptible to
severe diseases.

The historians of that time were too much occupied with the intricate
affairs of the court and of the church to devote any attention
to nature, and on this account they have left us no satisfactory
information of the state of the weather and the course of the seasons
of those years in England, yet there is no reason to suppose that they
were essentially different from those of the rest of Europe. This may
be proved by the following collection of important natural occurrences,
when taken in conjunction with the circumstances already stated
respecting France and Italy.

In Upper Italy such considerable floods occurred in all the river
districts, in the year 1527, that the astrologers announced a new
Deluge. There was a repetition of them to an equal extent, and
with equal damage, in the following year, so that it may have been
concluded, not without some ground, that there was an accumulation
of snow on the highest mountain ranges of Europe. On the 3rd of
July, 1529, there followed a violent earthquake in Upper Italy, and
immediately afterwards a blood-rain, as it was called, in Cremona[539].

In October, 1530, the Tiber rose so much above its banks that in Rome
and its neighbourhood about 12,000 people were drowned. A month later,
in the Netherlands, the sea broke through the dykes, and Holland,
Zealand, and Brabant suffered very considerably from the overflow of
the waters, which again took place two years afterwards[540].

In 1528 there appeared in the March of Brandenburg, during the
prevalence of a south-east wind and a great drought[541], (the rains
did not commence in Germany before 1529,) _swarms of locusts_[542],
as if this prognostic too of great epidemics was not to be wanting.
Of fiery meteors, which also frequently appeared in the following
years, and in the aggregate plainly indicated an unusual condition
of the atmosphere, much notice, after the manner of the times, is
occasionally taken[543]. Particular attention was excited by a long
fiery train which was seen on the 7th of January, 1529, at seven
o’clock in the morning, throughout Mecklenburg and Pomerania[544].
Another fiery sign (chasma) was seen in the March on the 9th
of January, at ten o’clock at night[545], as likewise similar
atmospherical phenomena in other localities.

Comets appeared in the course of this year in unusual number[546].
The first on the 11th of August, 1527, before daybreak; it was seen
throughout Europe, and it has often been confounded by more recent
writers with an atmospherical phenomenon resembling a comet which
appeared on the 11th of October[547]. The second was seen in July and
August, 1529, in Germany, France, and Italy. Four other comets are also
said to have made their appearance this year at the same time; but it
is probable that these were only fiery meteors of an unknown kind[548].
The third was in 1531, and was visible in Europe from the 1st of
August till the 3rd of September. This was the great comet of Halley,
which returned in the year 1835[549]. The fourth was in 1532, visible
from the 2nd of October to the 8th of November; it appeared again in
1661[550]. Lastly, the fifth, in 1533, seen from the middle of June
till August[551].

Contemporaries agree remarkably in their accounts of the insufferable
state of the weather in the eventful year 1529. The winter was
particularly mild, and the vegetation was far too early, so that all
the world was rejoicing at the mildness and beauty of the spring. The
people wore violets, at Erfurt, on St. Matthew’s day, (the 24th of
February,) little expecting that this friendly omen was to precede
so severe a calamity[552]. Throughout the spring and summer wet
weather continued to prevail. Constant torrents of rain overflowed the
fields, the rivers passed their banks; all hopes of the cultivation
were entirely frustrated[553], and misery and famine spread in all
directions. A heavy rain of four days’ continuance, which took place
in the south of Germany in the middle of June, and was called the St.
Vitus’s Torrent, is still remembered in modern times as an unheard-of
event. Whole districts of country were completely laid under water,
and many persons perished who had not time to save their lives[554].
A similar, very widely extended, and perhaps universal, storm again
occurred on the 10th of August, and occasioned great floods, especially
in Thuringia and Saxony[555]. Upon the whole, the sun rarely broke
through the heavy dark clouds. The latter part of the summer and the
whole of the autumn, with the exception of a series of hot days which
commenced the 24th of August[556], remained gloomy, cold, and wet.
People fancied they were breathing the foggy air of Britain[557].

We ought not to omit here to notice that in the north of Germany, and
especially in the March of Brandenburg, eating fish, which were caught
in great abundance, was generally esteemed detrimental. Malignant and
contagious diseases were said to have been traced to this cause, and it
was a matter of surprise that the only food which nature bounteously
bestowed was so decidedly injurious[558]. It might be difficult now
to discover the cause of this phenomenon, of which we possess only
isolated notices, yet, passing over all other conjectures, it is quite
credible either that an actual fish poison was developed[559], or,
if this notion be rejected, that a disordered condition of life,
such as must be supposed to have existed in a great famine, rendered
fish prejudicial to health, in the same way as sometimes occurs after
protracted intermittent fevers, when the functions of the bowels are
disturbed in a manner peculiar to this disease.

But it was not the inhabitants of the water alone which were affected
by hidden causes of excitement in collective organic life; the fowls
of the air likewise sickened, who, in their delicate and irritable
organs of respiration, feel the injurious influence of the atmosphere
much earlier and more sensitively than any of the unfeathered tribes,
and have often been the harbingers of great danger, ere man was aware
of its approach. In the neighbourhood of Freyburg in the Breisgau,
dead birds were found scattered under the trees, with boils as large
as peas under their wings, which indicated among them a disease, that
in all probability extended far beyond the southern districts of the
Rhine[560].

The famine in Germany, during this year, is described by respectable
authorities in a tone of deep sympathy. Swabia, Lorraine, Alsace, and
the other southern countries bordering on the Rhine, were especially
visited, so that misery there reached the same frightful height as
in France. The poor emigrated and roved over the country, solely
to prolong their wretched existence. Above a thousand of these
half-starved mendicants came to Strasburg out of Swabia. They obtained
shelter in a monastery, and attempts were made to revive them, yet many
were unable to bear the food that was placed before them. Attention and
nourishment did but hasten their death. Another body of more than eight
hundred came in the autumn from Lorraine. These unfortunate people
were kept in the city, and fed during the whole winter[561], yet it is
easy to conceive that this benevolence, which was no doubt likewise
exercised in other cities[562]—for when was humanity ever found wanting
in Germany?—could only occasionally alleviate this deeply rooted
calamity. In the Venetian territories, many hundreds are said to have
perished with hunger, and a like distress probably prevailed all over
Upper Italy.

In the north of Germany, including the extensive sandy plains, on
which wet weather is not so injurious in its effect as on a heavy
clayey soil, the state of the country was upon the whole more
tolerable[563]; yet, independently of the innumerable evils to which
a scarcity gives rise, _suicide was more frequent_[564], which was
certainly a rarity in the sixteenth century, and only explicable by
supposing, that the powers of the mind became exhausted by the many and
various passions, which in every individual locality, excited a spirit
of hatred and party feeling. The consequence of such a state of turmoil
is a cold disgust of life, which finds, in the first adverse event that
may occur, a pretext for self-destruction, that want alone would seldom
if ever occasion: for man, if his spirit be unbroken, runs the chance
of starvation in times of famine, and trusts to the faintest gleam of
hope, rather than, of his own accord, abandon the enjoyment of life.

It is no less in point here to notice a kind of faint lassitude,
which, to the great astonishment of the people, was felt, especially
in Pomerania, in June and July[565], up to the very period when the
Sweating Sickness broke out. In the midst of their work, and without
any conceivable cause, people became palsied in their hands and
feet, so that even if their lives had depended upon it, they were
incapable of the slightest exertion[566]. The treatment which was found
successful, was to cover the patients warmly, and to supply them with
nourishing food, of which they ate plentifully, and thus recovered
again, in three or four days. Phenomena of this kind, which in the
present instance evidently depended on atmospherical influence, are but
the extreme gradations of a generally morbid dullness of vital feeling,
which might easily pass into an actual disgust of life, such as would
lead to suicide.

The following years were by no means all marked by a complete failure
in produce. The year 1530 was, on the contrary, plentiful, there being
only some partial failures, as, for example, that which arose from a
great flood in the district of the Saal, which occurred in the midst
of the harvest time[567]. A very cold spring and a wet cold summer
followed in 1531, with only occasional fine days; yet the ground
was not altogether unproductive, and the great distress which would
otherwise have been felt in Thuringia and Saxony, was checked by the
establishment of granaries, so that the people were not obliged, as
they often were in Swabia, to mow the green corn that they might dry
the ears in ovens, and support life upon the yet unripe grain.

The years 1532 and 1533, were again very sterile, as also 1534, in
consequence of the great heat and dryness of the summer. Finally,
in the year 1535, the regular change of the seasons, and with it
a prosperous state of cultivation, seemed to be restored, and the
scarcity ceased[568]. The reports from different localities in Germany
vary much, but the scarcity prevailed for full seven years[569], (from
1528 to 1534,) and since its causes were not discoverable, because it
was only seen by each observer in his own narrow circle, the old German
adage was often called to mind: “If there is to be a scarcity, it is of
no avail even should all the mountains be made of flour.”[570]



These facts are sufficient for a preliminary sketch of the background
on which moved the spectre of England, to which we now return. How
long the sweating sickness may have raged there after Henry the
VIIIth quitted his secluded place of refuge in order to return to his
capital, no one has left any written account to show. That it spread
very rapidly over the whole kingdom is decidedly to be presumed, and
might probably still be easily ascertainable from the written records
of different places. The notion that it did not rage violently in any
town more than a few weeks, is justified by corresponding phenomena
of more recent occurrence, yet no doubt it continued to exist among
the people, though in a mitigated degree, till the mild winter season.
But there are not even the slightest data by which it can be made
out that it was still in England during the summer of 1529. As an
epidemic it certainly existed no longer, yet on a consideration of the
state of the air in that year, it is not to be denied that isolated
cases of Sweating Fever may have appeared; for in pestilences of this
kind, provided their original causes continue, there always occur some
straggling cases[571]. The Sweating Sickness did not advance westward
to Ireland, nor did it pass the Scottish border; the historians, who
would certainly have recorded so calamitous an event, are entirely
silent respecting such an occurrence. The tragedy was, however,
destined to be enacted elsewhere; other nations were to play their part
in it.

Hamburgh was the first place on the continent in which the Sweating
Sickness broke out. Men’s minds were still in great excitement
there in consequence of the events of the few preceding months. The
Protestants had, after long and stormy contests, at length vanquished
the Papists. Under the wise direction of _Bugenhagen_ the great work
of Reformation was just completed. The monasteries were abolished, the
monks dismissed, schools were established, and peace again returned
with the enjoyment of ecclesiastical freedom. Just at this moment[572]
the dreaded pestilence, of which wonderful accounts had been so long
and so often heard, unexpectedly made its appearance. It immediately
excited, as it had ever done in England, general dismay, and before any
instructions as to its treatment could be obtained, either from the
English or from Germans who had been in England, it destroyed daily
from forty to sixty, and altogether, within the space of twenty-two
days[573], about 1100 inhabitants, for such was the number of coffins
which were at this time manufactured by the undertakers. The duration
of _the great mortality_, for thus we would designate the more violent
raging of this pestilence, was, however, much shorter, and may be
roughly estimated at about nine days, for from the fragment of a
letter received from Hamburgh, which was dispatched to Wittenberg on
the 8th of August, by a person who was at that time burgomaster, it
appears that, for some days past, no one had died of the Sweating
Fever, excepting one or two drunkards, and that the citizens were
then beginning to take breath again. We may thus judge, from the
unauthenticated account here mentioned, that the disease lasted about a
fortnight longer, and that the loss of lives amounted to 2000. At all
events, however, the pestilence manifested itself on the continent with
the same malignity which was peculiar to it from the first, and if the
assertion made at a distance respecting the mortality in Hamburgh, were
overcharged[574], yet there certainly existed sufficient foundation for
exaggerations of this sort, which are never wanting in times of such
great danger. The historians of this, even at that time, powerful and
civilized commercial town, have on the whole said but little regarding
this important event—a circumstance easily explicable from the constant
occupation of men’s minds in religious affairs, and from the well known
short visitation of the epidemic, which, like a transient meteor,
needed quick and cautious observation if any valuable information
respecting the occurrence was to be transmitted to posterity. Some
particulars of its first origin have, however, been preserved amid a
mass of general assertions which convey no information. Thus it appears
that the Sweating Sickness did not show itself in the town until a
Captain Hermann Evers, just about the time mentioned, (the 25th of
July,) returned from England, bringing on board with him a number of
young people, (probably travellers as well as sailors,) of whom at
least twelve died of this disease within two days[575]. According to
another account, those who died were not taken ill in England, but on
the voyage, and the pestilence broke out after the rest of the crew had
disembarked. On this point we have further a most respectable testimony
to the fact, that in the night after the landing of Hermann Evers, four
men died in Hamburgh of the Sweating Sickness[576].

If we examine a little more closely these very valuable accounts, the
credibility of which there is no reason to doubt, it must especially
be taken into account, that at this time the Sweating Sickness had
ceased to exist as an epidemic in England for at least half a year,
that its appearance in single cases, although not contradictory to
general views, is nevertheless by no means borne out by proof from
historical evidence, and that thus it is a gratuitous and unsupported
assumption that the return of Hermann Evers’ crew was connected with
any Sweating Sickness at all in England. If we consider, on the other
hand, that the North Sea, even in ordinary years, is very foggy, so
that, owing to the prevalence of north-west winds, it precipitates very
heavy rain clouds over Germany; and if we bear in mind, that in the
year 1529 it produced far heavier fogs than usual, we shall perceive in
its waters the principal cause why the English Sweating Sickness was
then developed in its greatest violence, and we may thence assume, with
a greater degree of probability, that this pestilence broke out among
the crew of Hermann Evers spontaneously, and without any connexion with
England, in the same way, perhaps, as it did formerly on board Henry
the VIIth’s fleet. This supposition is strengthened by the circumstance
that the ships of those times were excessively filthy, and the kind of
life spent on board them was, independently of the wretched provision,
uncomfortable in the highest degree, nay, almost insupportable, so that
even in short voyages, the scurvy, which was the dread of sailors in
those days, was of very common occurrence. Finally, we still possess
the most distinct accounts, that unusual occurrences took place in the
North Seas. Thus during Lent it was observed with astonishment at
Stettin, that porpoises came in numbers up the frische Haff as far as
the bridge, and that the Baltic cast on its shores many dead animals of
this kind[577], so that we are fully justified in concluding that there
existed at that time a more intense development than usual of morbific
influences in the marine atmosphere.

With respect, however, to the influence which the companions of
Hermann Evers, impregnated as they were with the odour of the Sweating
Sickness, had on the inhabitants of Hamburgh, it cannot be denied,
that their intercourse with those inhabitants, in the filthy and
narrow lanes of that commercial city, may have given an impulse to the
eruption of the pestilence, so far as to make the already existing fuel
more inflammable, or to furnish the first sparks for its ignition:
yet it is equally undeniable that, under the existing circumstances,
the epidemic Sweating Sickness would have broken out in Germany even
without the presence of Captain Evers, although it might, perhaps,
have been some weeks later, and not have made its first appearance in
Hamburgh, whose inhabitants, owing to the constant prevalence of the
North Sea fog, were, to all appearance, already prepared for the first
reception of this fatal disease.

To determine to a day when epidemics which have been long in
preparation have broken out, is, even for an observer who is present,
exceedingly difficult, nay, sometimes, under the most favourable
circumstances, impossible; for there occur in these visitations,
certain transitions into the epidemic form, of diseases which are
allied to it, as well as a gradual conversion into it of morbid
phenomena, which have usually begun some time before. Unless we are
greatly mistaken, such was the case in the pestilence of which we are
now treating; although it must be confessed, that we can obtain no
precise information on this point from the physicians of those times.
The following statements, for the absolute precision of which we cannot
pledge ourselves after a lapse of 300 years, must therefore be judged
according to this general experience; and though singly they may prove
little, yet taken altogether, they are capable of demonstrating the
peculiar and almost wonderful manner in which the Sweating Fever spread
over Germany.

In Lübeck, the next city in the Baltic, the Sweating Sickness appeared
about the same time; for so early as the Friday before St. Peter _in
vinculis_ (30th of July), it was known, that on the preceding night
a woman had died of it[578]. On the following days cases of death
fearfully increased, and the disorder soon raged so violently, that
people were again reminded of the Black Death of 1349. The inhabitants
died without number, as well in the city as in the environs, and the
consternation was equal to that felt in Hamburgh[579]. In general, as
was everywhere the case, robust young people of the better classes were
affected, while, on the other hand, children and poor people living in
cellars and garrets almost all of them escaped[580].

Now one might, either on the supposition of a progressive alteration
in the atmosphere, such as occurs in the influenza, or on that of a
communication of the disease from man to man, which, however, cannot
be considered as a principal cause of this epidemic, have expected a
gradual extension of the Sweating Sickness from Hamburgh and Lübeck
to the surrounding country. This did not, however, in fact, take
place; for the disease next broke out at Twickau, at the foot of the
Erzgebirge, distant from Hamburgh fifty German miles, and without
having previously visited the rich commercial city of Leipzig. By
the 14th of August, nineteen persons who had died of it, were buried
at Twickau; and on one of the following nights above a hundred[581]
sickened, whence it is to be deduced that the pestilence was severe at
that place.

Possibly the great storm on the 10th of August may have given
an impulse to the development of this very remarkable epidemic;
for an highly electrical state of the atmosphere increases the
susceptibility for diseases. It is likewise not to be overlooked,
that on the 24th of August, while the sky was overcast, there came
on an insufferable heat[582], which must have debilitated the body
after such long-continued cold wet weather. At all events, in the
beginning of September, we find that the Sweating Fever broke out at
the same time at _Stettin_, _Dantzig_, and other Prussian cities; at
_Augsburg_, far to the south on the other side of the Danube, at
_Cologne_ on the Rhine, at _Strasbourg_, at _Frankfort_ on the Maine,
at _Marburg_[583], at _Göttingen_, and at _Hanover_[584]. The position
of these cities gives an impressive notion of the extent of country
of which the English Sweating Sickness took possession, as it were by
a magic stroke. It was like a violent conflagration, which spread in
all directions; the flames, however, did not issue from one focus, but
rose up everywhere, as if self-ignited; and whilst all this occurred in
Germany and Prussia, the inhabitants of the other northern countries,
Denmark, Norway and Sweden, perhaps also Lithuania, Poland and Russia,
were likewise visited by this violent disease.

The malady appeared in Stettin on the 31st of August, among the
servants of the Duke[585]. On the 1st of September, the Duchess herself
sickened, in common with many people about the court, and burgesses in
the city. A few days afterwards several thousands were affected by the
disease, so that there was not a street from which some corpses were
not daily carried out. This dreadful period of terror, however, did
not last much longer than a week, for about the 8th of September the
pestilence abated in its violence, so as no longer to be regarded with
terror; and after this time only a few isolated cases occurred[586].

On the same day, namely, the 1st of September, the disease appeared
in Dantzig, fifty German miles further to the eastward, and was
here also so destructive, that it carried off in a short time 3000
inhabitants[587], some say even 6000—but this seems certainly too high
an estimate for Dantzig, and probably includes the greater part of
Prussia. If we were to give credence to an anonymous reporter[588],
this plague abated _in five days_, and relieved the inhabitants from
the mortal anxiety which, until they recovered their senses, led them
everywhere to commit acts of injustice and injury to avert the danger.

In Augsburg we find the Sweating Sickness on the 6th of September.
It lasted there also only _six days_, affected about 1500 of the
inhabitants, and destroyed more than half that number, or, as it is
said, about 800[589].

At Cologne it appeared precisely at the same time, as we learn from
the expressions of the Count von Newenar, a prelate of that place, who
finished his account of this disorder on the 7th of September[590]. At
Strasburg it broke out some ten or twelve days earlier, namely, on the
24th of August. In this place about 3000 people sickened in one week,
but very few of them died[591]. At Frankfort on the Maine they were
holding the autumn fair (which began on the 7th of September) just at
the time when the Sweating Sickness prevailed[592], whence arose the
opinion, which has been broached again in more modern times[593], that
the traders on their return carried the disease thence throughout the
whole of Germany, and that in the intercourse by means of this fair,
the main cause of the spread of the epidemic was to be found. After
the facts which have been brought forward, such a narrow view needs no
refutation. The Sweating Sickness was fleeter than the conveyances of
goods and people, which at that time made their way along the pathless
and unbeaten roads; for “no sooner did a rumour of the approach of the
disease reach anyplace than the disease itself accompanied it.”[594]

Between the boundaries which have been indicated, only a few isolated
towns and villages escaped, and there are probably few of the
chronicles of that age, so prolific of great events, in which the
dreadful scourge of the year 1529 is not expressly mentioned; yet the
sweating fever, like other great epidemics, spread, doubtless, very
unequally, and it is ascertained that the further south it extended,
the milder it was upon the whole; and also that all those places where
it broke out late suffered beyond comparison less than those which were
visited early in September and in the latter part of August; for not
to lay much stress on the sultry heat from the 24th of August, which
probably did not last long, the chief cause of its great malignity at
first was the violent method resorted to in the treatment of the sick,
the inapplicability of which was fortunately soon perceived. Only one
citizen was affected with the Sweating Sickness in Marburg, and even
he recovered[595], whilst at Leipzig, the pestilence either never
broke out at all, or very much later, perhaps in October or November;
for the physicians of that place gave it clearly to be understood in
their pamphlets, that they knew nothing of the disease from their own
observations[596], and no sooner did the report get abroad that the
dreaded enemy had not penetrated within the walls of this commercial
city, than crowds of fugitives came thither from far and near in order
to seek protection and security, although the place in itself was by
no means fitted for a place of refuge, for the swampy atmosphere which
rose from the city ditches begot, even in those days, in the narrow and
dark streets, many lingering diseases[597].



It is remarkable that the Netherlands were visited by the Sweating
Fever[598] full four weeks later, although the commercial intercourse
with England, if we were to attach any especial importance to this
circumstance, was far more considerable than that of the German cities
in the North Sea. It appeared for the first time in Amsterdam on the
27th of September in the forenoon, whilst the city was enveloped in a
thick fog[599], and just at the same time, perhaps a day earlier, in
Antwerp, where, on the 29th of September, they made a solemn procession
in order by prayer to avert greater harm from the city; for in the
last days of September 400 to 500 people died of the English Sweating
Sickness at that place[600]. It might have been supposed that the damp
soil of Holland, and its impenetrable fogs, would invite the pestilence
much earlier than the high and serene country between the Alps and the
Danube, or the far distant land of Prussia, but the development of
epidemics follows no human calculation or medical views! In the towns
around Amsterdam the Sweating Fever appears not to have broken out
until the mortality had ceased in that city, that is to say, five days
after the 27th of September, so that we cannot be far wrong in assuming
that in the latter end of that month, and the commencement of October,
it had spread over the whole territory of the Netherlands including
Belgium[601]. Alkmaar and Waterland remained free[602], as doubtless
had been the case with particular places both in England and Germany.

_The exceedingly short time that the Sweating Sickness lasted_ in the
different places that it visited, was as astonishing as its original
appearance. For since it raged in Amsterdam for only five days, and not
much longer, as we have shewn, in Antwerp and many German towns, it
could hardly have continued more than fifteen days in any other places;
thus displaying the same peculiarity on this occasion by which it had
already been marked in its former visitations. This short period,
however, must not be understood to include the sporadic occurrence of
the disease, otherwise, as a contemporary of credit assures us, that
the sweating fever attacked some persons twice and others three or even
four times[603], we might thence conclude, that, although perhaps in
some places the pestilence did, after raging for a certain number of
days, suddenly cease, so that no isolated cases afterwards occurred,
yet that the general duration of its prevalence was longer than has
been stated.



The eruption of the Sweating Fever in Denmark[604], took place at _the
latter end of September_, for on the 29th of that month, four hundred
of the inhabitants died of it at Copenhagen[605]. Elsinore was likewise
severely visited[606], and probably, about the same time, most of the
towns and villages in that kingdom. But the accounts on this subject
in the Danish Chronicles are extremely defective[607], as owing to
the extraordinary rapidity of this mortal malady, contemporary writers
neglected to record, for the information of posterity, the details of
a phenomenon, which there, as in other countries, must certainly have
been striking from its general prevalence. Even from the imperfect
notices that were given respecting it, thus much, however, is clearly
perceptible, that it was the same well-known disease as elsewhere,
which was now observed to pass through Denmark. In proof of this, it
was principally young and strong people, as had been originally the
case in England, who sickened, the old and infirm being less affected,
and in the course of four and twenty hours, or at most, within two days
(?) the life or death of the patient was decided.

At the same period as in Denmark, the Sweating Sickness spread over
the _Scandinavian Peninsula_, and was productive of the same violent
symptoms in the sick, the same terror, and the same mortal anguish in
those who were affected by it, not only in the capital of Sweden, where
_Magnus Erikson_, brother of king _Gustavus Wasa_, died of it, but also
over the whole kingdom, and in Norway. The northern historians gave
graphic accounts of it, which, on a careful examination of manuscript
documents, might perhaps gain still more in colouring and spirit[608].
That the Sweating Sickness likewise penetrated into Lithuania, Poland,
and Livonia, if not into a part of Russia, we know only in a general
way[609], but doubtless there are written documents still in existence
in these countries, which only need some careful enquirer to bring
them to light. In the mean time, however, it is to be presumed, from
the early appearance of the disorder in Prussia, that it prevailed
in those countries at the same time as in Germany, Denmark, and the
Scandinavian Peninsula. No certain trace is anywhere to be discovered
that the Sweating Sickness appeared so late as December, 1529, or in
January of the following year, so that, after having lasted upon the
whole a quarter of a year, it disappeared everywhere without leaving
behind it any sign of its existence, or giving rise to the development
of any other diseases. Among these, it pursued its course as a comet
among planets, without interfering either with the French Hunger Fever,
or the Italian Petechial Fever, proving a striking example to all
succeeding ages of those general shocks to which the lives of the human
race are subject, and a fearful scourge to the generation which it
visited.



The alarm which prevailed in Germany surpasses all description, and
bordered upon maniacal despair. As soon as the pestilence appeared on
the continent, horrifying accounts of the unheard-of sufferings of
those affected, and the certainty of their death, passed like wild-fire
from mouth to mouth. Men’s minds were paralysed with terror, and the
imagination exaggerated the calamity, which seemed to have come upon
them like a last judgment. The English Sweating Sickness was the theme
of discourse everywhere, and if any one happened to be taken ill of
fever, no matter of what kind, it was immediately converted into this
demon, whose spectre form continually haunted the oppressed spirit. At
the same time, the unfortunate delusion existed, that whoever wished to
escape death when seized with the English pestilence, _must perspire
for twenty-four hours without intermission_[610]. So they put the
patients, whether they had the Sweating Sickness or not, (for who had
calmness enough to distinguish it?) instantly to bed, covered them
with feather-beds and furs, and whilst the stove was heated to the
utmost, closed the doors and windows with the greatest care to prevent
all access of cool air. In order, moreover, to prevent the sufferer,
should he be somewhat impatient, from throwing off his hot load, some
persons in health likewise lay upon him, and thus oppressed him to such
a degree, that he could neither stir hand nor foot, and finally, in
this rehearsal of hell, being bathed in an agonizing sweat, gave up the
ghost, when, perhaps, if his too officious relatives had manifested a
little discretion, he might have been saved without difficulty[611].

There dwelt a physician in Zwickau—we no longer know the name of this
estimable man—who, full of zeal for the good of mankind, opposed this
destructive folly. He went from house to house, and wherever he found
a patient buried in a hot bed, dragged him out with his own hands,
everywhere forbad that the sick should thus be tortured with heat, and
saved by his decisive conduct, many, who but for him, must have been
smothered like the rest[612]. It often happened, at this time, that
amidst a circle of friends, if the Sweating Sickness was only brought
to mind by a single word, first one, and then another was seized
with a tormenting anguish, their blood curdled, and certain of their
destruction, they quietly slunk away home, and there actually became a
prey to death[613]. This mortal fear is a heavy addition to the scourge
of rapidly fatal epidemics, and is, properly speaking, an inflammatory
disease of the mind, which, in its proximate effects upon the spirits,
bears some resemblance to the nightmare. It confuses the understanding,
so as to render it incapable of estimating external circumstances
according to their true relations to each other; it magnifies a gnat
into a monster, a distant improbable danger into a horrible spectre
which takes a firm hold of the imagination; all actions are perverted,
and if during this state of distraction, any other disease break out,
the patient conceives that he is the devoted victim of the much
dreaded epidemic, like those unfortunate persons, who, having been
bitten by a harmless animal, nevertheless become the subjects of an
imaginary hydrophobia. Thus, during the calamitous autumn of 1529,
many may have been seized with only an imaginary Sweating Sickness,
and under the towering heap of clothing on their loaded beds have met
with their graves[614]. Others among these brain-sick people who had
the good fortune to remain exempt from bodily ailments, many of them
even boasting of their firmness, fell, through the violent commotions
in their nerves, into a state of chronic hypochondriasis, which, under
circumstances of this sort, is marked by shuddering, and a feeling
of uneasiness and dread at the bare mention of the original cause of
terror, even when there is no longer any trace of its existence[615].
A person thus disordered in his mind, was recently seen to destroy
himself[616] on receiving false intelligence of the return of the
late epidemic; thus betraying conduct even more dastardly than those
cowardly soldiers, who, when the cannon begin to roar, inflict on
themselves slight wounds that they may avoid sharing the dangers of the
battle.

To have a full notion how men’s minds were previously prepared for this
state, we have but to think on the monstrous events which took place
in Germany. Twelve years earlier the gigantic work of the reformation
had been begun by the greatest German of that age, and, with the
Divine power of the gospel, triumphantly carried through up to that
period. The excitement was beyond all bounds. The new doctrine took
root in towns and villages, but nevertheless the most mortal party
hatred raged on all sides, and as usually happens in times of such
empassioned commotion, selfishness was the animating spirit which ruled
on both sides, and seized the torch of faith, in order, for her unholy
purposes, to envelop the world in fire and flames.

So early as the year 1521, during Luther’s concealment within the
walls of Wartburg, false prophets[617] arose, and desired, without the
aid of their great Master, who was the soul of that age, to complete
a work with the spirit of which they were not imbued. They brought
the wildest passions into action, but, destitute of innate firmness,
and incapable of curbing themselves, they became incendiaries and
iconoclasts. Immediately upon this the unhappy peasant-war broke out—a
consequence of the arbitrary conduct and oppression practised from
times of old, for which the abettors of Dr. Eck’s sentiments would
charge Luther himself as answerable; not perceiving that it was the
excitement of the times and of the false prophets which had given
occasion to the rebellion. Events occurred, from the recollection of
which human feeling still recoils. Never was the fair soil of Germany
the scene of more atrocious cruelties; and after vengeance had played
her insane part without opposition, the melancholy result was, that
hundreds of thousands of once peaceful, and for the most part misled
peasants, fell by the sword of the Lansquenets and of the executioner,
while their numerous survivors became a prey to the dearth which
visited the country in the following years. The battle of Frankenhausen
on the 15th of May, 1525, and Münzer’s subsequent execution, closed
this bloody scene. The consequences of such intestine commotions
continued however to be felt long after, and considered apart from
their highly prejudicial influence on the prosperity of the people,
conduced not a little to break the spirit of mankind, signs of which
the wise men of those times have plainly pointed out[618].



The dejection was increased by the universally active spirit of
persecution with which it was still hoped to eradicate the new
doctrine. Even whilst the English pestilence was raging, two
Protestants were burnt at Cologne[619]. In the same year faggots
blazed at Mecklin, Verden, and Paris, by the flames of which the
ancient faith was to be protected against the pestilence of freedom
of thought. Sentences of death were also quite commonly pronounced
against the Anabaptists in Protestant countries. The University of
Leipzig pronounced a condemnation of this sort in the year 1529, and
in Freistadt eleven women were drowned after a nominal trial and
sentence, because they acknowledged that they were of this sect[620].
Amidst these dissensions, and when the empire was in this helpless
condition, came the fear of the barbarians of the south, who had
already conquered Hungary under their Sultan Soliman, and, whilst the
English Sweat was raging in the countries of the Danube, threatened to
overwhelm Germany. It was a time of distress and lamentations, in which
even the most undaunted could scarcely sustain their courage[621];
but to the everlasting honour of the Germans it must be acknowledged
that they withstood this purifying fire with unsullied honour, and in
a manner worthy of themselves. For their noble spirits were aroused
to unheard-of exertions of energy, and whilst the pusillanimous gave
themselves up to despair, they impressed on the gigantic work of their
age the stamp of imperishable truth.

The siege of Vienna began on the 22d of September, after the English
pestilence had broken out in this capital of Austria, yet nobody
regarded this internal danger. The repeated attempts made by the
Turks to storm the town were repulsed with great courage, and, on
the 15th of October, Soliman raised the siege, after the Sweating
Sickness had raged with as much violence among his troops as among the
besieged[622]. There is no accurate intelligence extant upon this
subject, because the pestilence was less regarded here than elsewhere,
in consequence of the great distress of the country from other causes,
yet the mortality in Austria under such unfavourable circumstances, was
doubtless more considerable than in the neighbouring states[623].

In the north of Germany another struggle was to be decided. The
evangelical party wished to declare their faith before the empire and
its ruler, to reveal the object of their efforts, and to defend the
purity of their creed against danger and assault. For this purpose
they prepared themselves with wise discretion, and in the measures
taken by the reformers for the fortification of the great work, not
the slightest trace was to be observed of the anxiety which at that
time agitated the people. In the midst of a country whose inhabitants
trembled at the new disease, and were perhaps already severely
afflicted with it, did Luther, whilst at Marburg[624], sketch the first
outlines of a profession of faith, which, as filled up by Melancthon,
has become the foundation-stone of the evangelical church; and in the
following spring, during his stay at Cobourg, he composed his sublime
hymn, “Eine feste burg ist unser Gott,” a strong fortress is our God.

It could not but happen that, in the religious struggles which took
place in these years, especial importance would be attributed to
the English pestilence. Epidemics readily appear to man, in the
narrow circle of his view, as scourges of God; and, indeed, this
representation of them has ever been the prevailing one in all
religions. For it is easier to estimate the ever-existing sins of
humanity than the grand commotions comprehending both mind and body,
of a terrestrial organism, which can only be perceived by a superior
insight into things; and the mean selfishness of mankind and their
delusions respecting their own qualities induce them to adopt the more
easily the partial view, that the Supreme Being allows pestilences to
exist only to destroy their enemies of another faith. On this account,
not only do most contemporary writers speak of the just wrath of God,
and of the chastisement thus prepared for the sins of the world[625],
but the papal party took every possible pains to represent the English
pestilence as a punishment for heresy and an evident warning against
the triumphant doctrines of Luther. The cases in Hamburgh, where the
eruption of the Sweating Sickness almost immediately followed the
abolition of the monasteries, may certainly have obtained credit for
such representations among the wavering and short-sighted, and, in a
hundred other towns also, the Papists may have taken advantage of a
similar occurrence of circumstances, for 1529 was a year when great
and important questions were decided. At Lübeck, the monks in general
preached that the English sweating fever was but a punishment which
heaven inflicted on the Martineans, for so they called the followers
of Luther, and the people were not undeceived until they saw with
astonishment that Catholics also fell sick and died[626]. They went,
however, much further, and did not hesitate to employ even falsehood
and cruel revenge to gain their ends. Thus it was asserted that the
meeting of the reformers at Marburg, on the 2d of October, had led to
no union among them, because a panic at the new disease had seized the
heretics[627]. Never did a dastardly fear of death enter the heart
of Luther, who, when the plague broke out at Wittenburg in 1527,
cheerfully and courageously remained at his post whilst all around him
fled, and the high school was removed to Jena. Moreover, as we have
seen, the Sweating Sickness never once came near Marburg, and the union
of the two evangelical churches failed on totally different grounds.

In Cologne the zealots were of opinion that they ought to endeavour to
appease the visible wrath of God by the punishment of the heretics,
and it was this sanguinary delusion, worthy of savage barbarians,
which hastened the burning of Flistedt and Clarenbach[628]. To the
completion of this picture of the times, many other minor touches might
be added, of which the following may be taken as an example. In the
March of Brandenburg the evangelical faith, notwithstanding great
obstacles, spread every day more and more, and the Catholic priests
soon found themselves deserted. Just as the Sweating Sickness broke out
at Friedeberg, in the Newmark, a curate there delivered a sermon full
of enthusiasm and passion, and endeavoured to convince his apostate
congregation that God had invented a new plague in order to chastise
the new heresy. A solemn procession, according to ancient usage and
orthodox prescription, was to be held on the following day, and thus
the congregation was to be led back into the bosom of the only true
church. But behold, in the course of the night, the zealous curate died
of some sudden disease; and as mankind are ever ready to interpret even
the thunders of the Eternal according to their own wishes and narrow
notions, the Protestants, it seems, did not fail in their turn to
represent this event as a miracle[629].



Under these circumstances, the faculty had a very difficult problem
before them, for the very imperfect solution of which they cannot
justly be reproached. A learned and active physician is certainly one
of the noblest of the diversified forms of humanity; for he unites in
himself the power arising from an insight into the works of nature,
with the exercise of a pure philanthropy inseparable from his office.
Few men, however, of this ideal perfection lived in those times, and
their mitigating influence over the violence of the epidemic, which
was generally past before they could closely examine their new enemy
and give any deliberate advice, was doubtless but very inconsiderable.
By so much the more busy were the ignorant and covetous, who, from
time immemorial, the more numerous body in the profession, have always
injured it in its moral dignity. They attacked the disease with bold
assertions, alarmed the people with inconsiderate representations,
lauded the infallibility of their remedies, and were the promulgators
of injurious prejudices. In the Netherlands, as we are assured
by _Tyengius_, a physician whom we reckon among the learned and
benevolent, a vast number of patients died of the effects produced by
the distribution of pernicious pamphlets, with which the Sweating
Sickness was to be combated by those ignorant interlopers, who many
of them gave it out that they had been in England, boasting to the
inhabitants of their experience and skill, and with their pills and
their “hellish electuaries,” flitting about from place to place[630],
especially where rich merchants were to be found, from whom, should
they be restored, they obtained the promise of mines of gold[631]. The
like occurred in Germany, where, at the commencement, the sound sense
of the people was overcome by this officiousness, and violent remedies
were recommended as certain means of cure, in a deluge of pamphlets,
some of which were written by persons not in the profession.

From this impure source was derived the prescription of the
compulsory[632] perspiration for twenty-four hours, which, in the
districts of the Rhine, was called the Netherlands regimen[633]; and
it is unpardonable, that the physicians, either with blind pride
disregarded, or were totally unacquainted with the prior experience of
the English, which advocated discretion and the most appropriate line
of treatment. This neglect, which was not compensated until thousands
had already fallen, may possibly have arisen from the blameable silence
of the English physicians, of whom, as if England had not yet been
enlightened by the dawn of science, not an individual had written on
the Sweating Sickness, or proposed a reasonable line of treatment,
since the year 1485. Between England and Germany there existed,
nevertheless, a constant intercourse; and it is incredible that that
mode of procedure, which did not originate from a formal medical
school, but from the sound sense of the people, should not have become
earlier known on this side of the North Sea.

We must not here overlook the habits and domestic manners of the
Germans, for these favoured not a little the baneful prejudice with
regard to heat, for which we would not altogether make the physicians
responsible. Housewives, even at that time, set far too much store
by high beds, which annually received the feathers of the geese
consumed at the table. The comforts of a warm feather bed were highly
appreciated, and least of all were they disposed to deny them to the
sick. Thus all inflammatory disorders were stimulated to much greater
malignity, because such a bed either caused a dry heat, even to the
extent of burning fever, or a useless debilitating perspiration. To
this effect the very extensive misuse of hot baths conduced; and no
less so the custom of clothing much too warmly. Upon the whole the
notion was prevalent, as well with the people as with medical men,
that diseases were to be combated by warmth and sudorifics. To new
epidemics, however, the prevailing notions and customs are always
applied; for the great mass of mankind, among whom may be included
medical men, are entirely ruled by them; so that in this instance, the
Sweating Sickness fell upon a country in which its utmost malignity
would be called forth.

Yet after the first few days, in which many unfortunate cases occurred,
people became aware of the error they had committed. An advocate of the
twenty-four hours’ sudation, who, though not a medical man, had lauded
this practice in a pamphlet on the subject[634], died in Zwickau on the
5th of September, the victim of his own imprudence. A few days after
him died an apothecary, likewise treated with the heated bed. Upon
this the physicians immediately abandoned the practice, directed that
their patients should be sweated only for five or six hours, and in a
more moderate degree: and the estimable anonymous writer to whom we
have already alluded, thus seemed to meet with converts to his belief.
In Hamburgh also, men became convinced of the pernicious effects of
feather beds, and gave the preference to coverings of blankets[635];
for the English plan of treatment was presently known, and intelligent
philanthropists, who saw its curative powers, made it public[636] in
all quarters, through the medium of their correspondence. In Lübeck
there lived at the time of the Sweating Fever a learned Protestant
Englishman, Dr. Anthony Barns, who, with great kindness, made known
everywhere the English treatment of the disease. He was, however, after
the cessation of the pestilence, banished from the city, because he
had petitioned the bigoted Catholic senate to tolerate his Protestant
brethren. Many were saved by him; for it was the practice in this city
also, _to stew to death_[637] those affected with the disease. In
Stettin the English treatment was promulgated in good time, and two
travelling artisans who had come thither from Hamburgh, were of the
greatest assistance to the inhabitants of this city, by advising them
to take the feathers out of their upper beds; they made known likewise
how the sickness had been treated with success. They had seen cases
themselves, and could therefore distinguish by their odour those who
were suffering from the true sweating epidemic, from those who were
seized with fever arising from panic. They were constantly besieged by
persons asking questions and seeking assistance; and when the disease
was at its greatest height, the streets were quite illuminated at
night by the lights of the relatives of the patients[638], who were
running in all directions in a state of distraction. The abhorrence
of feather beds, and the hot plan, now followed so quickly the blind
recommendation of the twenty-four hours’ sweat, that by the middle
of September, and in many places still earlier, more correct views
were generally adopted, and some intelligent men, after the sad
experience which had been gained, seized the opportunity of doing more
good to the public than their noisy predecessors, who had by this
time so abundantly supplied the churchyards with bodies. Among these
literally and truly _beneficent_ physicians may be reckoned Peter
Wild, at Worms[639], who warned his countrymen against the Netherlands
practice[640]; as also an anonymous person, (the names of the best
often remain unknown in times of confusion,) who, in popular language,
strenuously dissuaded the people against the use of feather beds[641].
It also soon became a common saying, ”the Sweating Sickness will bear
no medicine.”[642]

There is no ground for supposing that the influence of the faculty
was much greater in the country where the Sweating Sickness originated
than it was in Germany, for the number of learned physicians there was
still fewer, and the knowledge of medicine not nearly so extended as it
was in Italy, Germany, and France. The learned Linacre had already died
in the year 1524. John Chambre[643], Edward Wotton[644], and George
Owen[645], were the King’s body physicians about the time of the fourth
epidemic visitation of the Sweating Sickness. William Butts[646] of
whom Shakespeare[647] has made honourable mention, in all probability
likewise held a similar office. These were certainly distinguished and
worthy men[648], but posterity has gained nothing from them on the
subject of the English Sweating Sickness. All these physicians were
well informed, zealous, and doubtless also cautious followers of the
ancient Greek school of medicine, but their merits were of no advantage
to the people, who, when they departed from the dictates of their own
understanding, and did not content themselves with domestic remedies,
to which they had been accustomed, fell into the hands of a set of
surgeons so rude and ignorant that they could only exist in the state
of society which then prevailed[649].



Inexplicable as the silence of the learned physicians of England, on
the Sweating Sickness, appears at first view, (for where is the use
of learning if it fail to throw any light on the stormy phenomena
of life?) we may yet find, perhaps, its cause in a perfectly simple
external circumstance. The reformation had not yet begun in England,
the Catholic Church still stood on its ancient foundations, and an
intellectual intercourse between the learned and the people was not
by any means among the acknowledged desiderata. The faculty would
hence have been able to treat of the new disorder only in ponderous
Latin works, for they wrote unwillingly in their own language, and the
subject could not seem to them an appropriate one for this purpose,
because they found it unnoticed and uninvestigated by their highly
revered masters the Greeks. They were ignorant that a sweating fever
had ever appeared among the ancients, which, otherwise, might have
incited them to make researches of their own on the subject; for
Aurelian, who describes it to the life, was either unknown to them, or,
what at that time was a valid ground, was despised by them, on account
of his bad (unclassical) language.

In Germany, on the contrary, the intellectual wants of the people
and of the educated classes had already manifested themselves very
differently. Twelve years before, the age of pamphlets had there
commenced. The thoughts of Luther and of his disciples, as also of
his opposers were winged by the rapid press, and the people took an
impassioned part in the endeavours of the learned to affect their
conviction, and by this altogether novel and authoritative mode of
religious instruction, became gradually educated and guided. Hence
it is not to be wondered at that people began to investigate, in
pamphlets, other important subjects likewise, and thus we see this
weighty branch of intellectual commerce, with all its advantages and
defects, also turned towards the discussion of popular diseases, and
for the first time unfolding its numerous leaves on the subject of the
English epidemic. In the maritime cities nothing of this kind happened,
because the eruption of the pestilence took them by surprise, and as it
was over again in the course of a few weeks, it seemed no longer worth
while to instruct the people respecting it.

This surprise was very plainly shewn in the answer of the doctors and
licentiates who were assembled together at the bedside of the Duchess,
at Stettin: “the disease was new and unknown to them: they were at a
loss what to advise, excepting strengthening medicines.”[650] In the
central parts of Germany, on the contrary, where, as early as the
month of August, the report of the new plague had excited the utmost
alarm, and where an eruption of the pestilence in Zwickau had caused
a general flight, publications on the Sweating Sickness were even
within that month, and still more numerously in September, disseminated
in all directions. As scientific productions, they are almost all
of them worthless. Many of them, indeed, did harm, and but very few
promulgated correct views. Most of them are now lost, as, for example,
that which was published by the printer Frantz, at Zwickau, on the 3rd
of September: but in what vast numbers they were published appears
from the circumstance that Dr. Bayer, at Leipzig, who brought out his
own on the 4th of September, states that he has read many of them, and
expresses his indignation against these “new unfounded little books,”
by which the people were misled to their own sorrow and suffering[651].
This same Dr. Bayer writes in the style of an intelligent practical
physician, inveighs boldly against the prejudices of mankind, and
the ignorance of medical _journeymen_, and against their senseless
bleedings whenever they see the barber’s basin and his pole. Some of
his advice too is not bad, especially where he is speaking of the
Arabian use of harmless syrups. He, however, religiously preserves
all the rubbish of his age, and has a great opinion of preventive
bleedings, purgatives, and powerful medicines, of which he prescribes
so many that his reader is necessarily confused by their multiplicity.
His precepts respecting the sweat are very appropriate, for he gives
a caution against forcing perspiration, prescribes according to the
circumstances, and even commences the treatment with an emetic, if the
state of the stomach seems to indicate its employment. In order to
guard against contagion, he recommends, at the approaching autumnal
fair, that foreigners from “_dying lands_” _should be accommodated in
distinct inns_, that fumigation should be carefully employed, and that
before each booth at the fair a fire should be kept up.

Another pamphlet by Caspar Kegeler, of Leipzig, is a melancholy
monument of the credulity which, from Herophilus to the present day,
has pervaded the whole medical art. It is a regular pharmacopœia for
the Sweating Sickness, thrown together at a venture, without any
insight into the nature of the disease. A mine of wonderful pills
and electuaries composed of numberless ingredients wherewith this
“mysterious worthy” undertakes to raise a commotion in the bodies of
his patients. If he had but seen even a single case of the disease he
would at least have known how impossible it would be to administer,
within the space of four-and-twenty hours, the hundredth part of his
pills and draughts. With what approbation this little pharmacopœia
was received by physicians of equal penetration and understanding as
himself, is shewn by the eight editions which it passed through[652],
and the melancholy reflection is therefore forced upon us, that
possibly thousands of sick persons were maltreated and sacrificed from
the employment of Kegeler’s medicines.

A third physician at Leipzig, Dr. John Hellwetter, states in his
pamphlet, that he has become acquainted with the Sweating Fever in
foreign countries, and on the subject of perspiration gives some very
good advice, evidently the result of his own experience, which reminds
us of the original English mode of treatment. His notion that fish
is injurious seems to have originated in the fact that the continued
employment of fish as an article of diet gives rise to offensive
perspirations, and his admonition to his medical brethren not to flee
from the sick, but to visit them sedulously and give them consolation,
furnishes ground for supposing that some of them had been pusillanimous
and dishonourable enough to withdraw themselves or to refuse their
assistance to the poor.

Almost all the medical men of those times were in possession of arcana
which they employed either in all or at least in most diseases, in
a very unprofessional manner, and the efficacy of which the sweet
delusions of self-interest did not permit them to call in question. The
severe metallic remedies of the Spagyric school, which was then in its
infancy, were not yet introduced, but there were not wanting strong
heating medicines from the ancient stores of the empyrics, which almost
universally obtained the preference over the mild potions and syrups of
the Arabians. Hellwetter sold a powder of unknown composition, and a
number of distilled waters, which Dr. Magnus Hundt, of Leipzig, notices
with much approbation. The pamphlet of this physician is in every
respect of the most ordinary kind; it affords no proof that the author
had any sound comprehension of the disease, and belongs to that class
of low medical compositions which, in times of danger, is so easily
derided by the public, and so much diminishes the estimation of the
profession, to the material injury of the general welfare.

It must not, however, be supposed that the people, who in such times
of commotion often confound together the good and the bad, listened
everywhere so readily to these pamphleteers. The composition of one
Dr. Klump, at Ueberlingen, who, on the breaking out of the disease,
attacked his patients with theriac and all kinds of heating plague
powders, excited great derision[653], and it cannot be denied that the
people had on their side, at least occasionally, the advantage of sound
sense, as opposed to the endless prescriptions of the physicians, and
it is gratifying to observe how this sound sense, which doubtless was
guided by respectable medical men, operated in a great many towns to
the advantage of those affected.

This is proved by a pamphlet, written in popular language, by a
physician in Wittenberg[654], which contains such correct medical
views, that our highest approbation is, even now, justly due to its
unknown author, as shewing, throughout, great judgment and a very
competent knowledge of the Sweating Fever. His whole treatment is
mild and cautious; he forbids the use of feather beds, but strongly
inculcates the necessity of avoiding every kind of chill, and therefore
recommends a practice in use at that time, called, “_the sewing of
the sick_,” that is to say, fastening the edge of the bed clothes to
the bed with a needle and thread. He orders his patients a moderate
quantity of warm but not heating beverage[655], refreshes them with
syrup of roses, and impresses upon his readers that the majority of
those affected will recover without medicine. In order to guard against
the stupor which was so exceedingly fatal, in addition to continual
conversation, refreshing odours of rose water and aromatic vinegar were
held before the patient’s nose, in a moderately damp cloth, or their
temples were cautiously bathed with them. Convalescents were watched
with great care, and it is not the least excellence of this very
sterling pamphlet that it likewise combated the timidity of the sick
with the inculcation of mild, but manly, religious principles, such as
corresponded with the spirit of that age. The rules here laid down are,
in essentials, the original English precepts which had already broken
the force of the epidemic Sweating Sickness in the year 1485, and the
author does not conceal his having in this matter received information
from Hamburgh, so far back as the 7th of August. That by this mode of
treatment not only individual patients[656] were saved, but also that
whole cities were protected against any very great mortality, we are
willing with the author to believe, and on this account we cannot but
lament the more, that the medical science of the rigid schools of those
days so completely mistook its office as the guardian of life, and
that it caused greater sacrifices by its hazardous remedies than the
pestilence would otherwise have occasioned.

How soon the English treatment met with the recognition which it
deserved may be gathered from a Latin composition nearly of the same
tenour as the above, and which appears to be an extract from some
German pamphlets[657]. Besides aromatic odoriferous waters, the
very harmless and only remedies therein recommended are pearls and
corals given internally by tablespoonfuls in warm rose water. As a
prophylactic, treacle, which was in very common use, was recommended to
be taken in the juice of roasted onions, but only in very small doses.
Similar just views with respect to the excitement of perspiration were
also subscribed to by other physicians[658], and finally the great
council at Berne, on the 18th of December, published an exhortation to
patience and unshaken courage, in which the use of feather beds, and
of all medicines, except cinnamon water, was earnestly deprecated[659]
during the disease. The court of Holland also recommended a method
of cure[660] apparently English, these two documents being the only
traces, on the part of any governments, of a paternal solicitude for
their subjects.

The learned and accomplished _Euricius Cordus_[661], of Marburg, had,
when he wrote[662], no information respecting the successful English
mode of treatment, and, with all his celebrity, only followed in the
ranks of ordinary advisers. He could not free himself from the medical
precepts which he brought from Italy and gave to the only patient
at Marburg, who was the subject of the Sweating Sickness, the very
disagreeable, though much employed potion of “Benedetto.”[663] His
prophylactic ordinances were very burthensome, though with respect
to the frequent employment of purgatives, which at that time almost
all physicians recommended, it must be taken into account, that the
intemperance so prevalent in those days, rendered them in general more
necessary, perhaps, than they are at the present time. Bishop Ditmar of
Merseburg, has betrayed to posterity, that this celebrated man had a
great dread of the new disorder, and did not conceal his anxiety[664].

There is still extant a very complicated prescription of _Achilles
Gasser_[665], the learned physician of Augsburg, which he employed
with childish confidence[666] during the prevalence of the sweating
pestilence. We might class this with a thousand others of a similar
character, were it not evident how little medical art, at that time in
its ancient Greek garb, was suited to the exigency of the age, being
dull, inefficient, and long since robbed of its original spirit; for
thus alone was it taught in the universities.

In the copious epistle of Simon Riquinus to the Count of Newenar at
Cologne[667], traces of better principles are indeed observable,
which were soon disseminated from Hamburgh all over Germany, yet the
prophylactic measures recommended are not much better than those in use
in the time of the Emperor Antoninus, when the Theriaca of Andromachus
was among the necessaries at the Roman court. Riquinus incidentally
tells a story of a peasant in the neighbourhood of Cleve, who, having
become affected by the English Sweating Sickness, crept as quickly
as he could into a baker’s oven that was still hot, and after some
time, again made his appearance in an exhausted state[668]. This very
circumstance proves that the man laboured under only an imaginary and
not a real sweating fever, but the belief that the bread which was
afterwards baked in this oven was infected with the poison, can only be
attributed to the credulity of the learned physician.

The Count of Newenar[669] expresses himself on the subject of the
sweating fever, like a person well informed, and not unacquainted
with medical subjects, and endeavours to prove the critical nature of
the sweat by the frequent practice of the empyrics, to throw persons
afflicted with the plague, at the very beginning of the attack, into
a profuse perspiration[670]. He takes the opportunity to relate of
an unprincipled physician, that he freed himself in this manner from
the plague, in a public bath, while those who came after him became
every one of them affected with the disease and died. According to his
account, the English Sweating Sickness was by no means fatal in and
about Cologne[671], yet we find it with all its original malignity on
the banks of the Scheldt, and in the maritime towns of the Netherlands.

This plainly appears from the pamphlet of a physician in great practice
at Ghent, Tertius Damianus, from Vissenaecken, near Tirlemont[672],
whose own wife fell sick of the sweating fever, and fortunately was
again restored[673]. The cases whereof Damianus gives an account,
are among the most marked of which any mention is made, and it also
seems, that the disease, contrary to the opinion of many, arose from
fear alone, and manifested in the Netherlands a much greater power
of contagion than in Germany, to which the hot treatment may have
contributed[674]. The manner in which Damianus restrained his patients
from indulging in their propensity to sleep, is worthy of notice. When
the usual means failed, he directed that their hair should be torn
out, that their limbs should be tied together in painful positions,
and that vinegar should be dropped into their eyes[675]: the danger
justified these means, but violence does not easily attain its end. For
the rest, the views of this physician do not differ from those commonly
entertained, and if he complains[676] of the great extortions of the
apothecaries, this was a natural effect of the customary prescriptions,
whereof he himself recommends many that are very objectionable.

Whatever the science of medicine of the sixteenth century could oppose
to so fearful an enemy, is set forth in the very excellent treatise of
_Joachim Schiller_[677] of Freiburg, which, however, did not appear
until two years later, and unfortunately does not give the wished-for
information on the development of the pestilence in the Briesgau.
Schiller is moderate in his views, and shews throughout, that he is a
very well informed physician, and well versed in Greek literature: and
although he cannot steer clear of the rubbish of clumsy remedies, yet
the fault should not be charged on him, but on the age in which he
lived. This, like every other, had its evils, and enveloped in clouds
and darkness the genius of medicine, which, free, great, and elevated
above human short-sightedness, is respected only by the intellectual
servants of nature.



The notions of contemporary writers respecting the phenomena and
the course of the sweating epidemic are, it is true, individually
unsatisfactory and defective[678]; yet collectively, we may gather from
them a lively and complete picture of its effect on the human frame;
especially from the German observers, who reported truly and honestly
their own, as well as the general experience of their age; for the
English had up to that period described little more than the external
appearances of this epidemic, which had already attacked them for the
fourth time.

It is ascertained that the _Sweating Fever was in general very
inflammatory_; and, leaving out of the account its sequel, _came to
a crisis at most in four and twenty hours_; yet, within this narrow
limit as to time, very various symptoms occurred[679], so that by a
more exact observation than could be expected from the physicians of
those days, several gradations of its development and violence might
have been distinguished from each other. Thus one form of this disease
appeared that was wanting in precisely that symptom which was the most
essential, namely, the colliquative sweating[680], (as in the most
dangerous form of cholera, neither vomiting nor purging takes place,)
and which, by its overpowering attack, either destroyed life within a
few hours, or perhaps took some other turn of a nature unknown to us.

Premonitory symptoms were wanting altogether, unless we may reckon as
such, first, an anguish, combined with palpitation of the heart, which
may not have been of corporeal origin, but may have proceeded from
the general alarm; or secondly, an irresistible sinking of the powers
resembling a swoon, which, perhaps, preceded the disorder, in the
same manner as it had preceded the general eruption of the plague in
northern Germany[681]: or thirdly, rheumatic pains of various kinds,
which were frequently felt in the summer of 1529[682]; or finally,
a disagreeable taste in the mouth and foul breath, which were very
commonly the subject of complaint at that time[683].

In most instances the disease set in like the generality of fevers,
with a _short shivering fit_[684] and trembling, which in very
malignant cases even passed into convulsions of the extremities[685];
in many it began with a moderate and constantly increasing heat[686]
either without any evident occasion, even in the midst of sleep, so
that the patients on waking lay in a state of perspiration, or from a
state of intoxication, and during hard work[687], especially in the
morning at sunrise[688]. Many patients experienced at the commencement
a disagreeable _creeping sensation_ or _formication on their hands
and feet_[689], which passed into pricking pains, and an exceedingly
_painful sensation under the nails_. At times likewise it was combined
with rheumatic cramps, and with such a weariness in the upper part of
the body, that the sufferers were totally incapable of raising their
arms[690]. Some were seen during these attacks, especially women and
those who were weak, with their hands and feet swollen[691].

Serious affections of the brain quickly followed; many fell into a
state of violent feverish delirium[692], and these generally died[693].
All complained of obscure _pain in the head_[694]; and it was not
long before an alarming _lethargy_ supervened[695], which, if it
was not firmly resisted, led to inevitable death by apoplexy. Thus
the unconscious sufferers were, at least, relieved from the pain
of separation from their friends, which would have been much more
distressing to them in this than in any other complaint, since they
lay, as it were, in a stinking swamp, tortured with suffering.

This mortal anguish accompanied them so long as they were in possession
of their senses, throughout the whole disease[696]. _In many the
countenance was bloated and livid_, or at least the lips and cavities
of the eyes were of a leaden tint; whence it evidently appears, that
the passage of the blood through the lungs was obstructed in the
same way as in violent asthma[697]; _hence they breathed with great
difficulty_, as if their lungs were seized with a violent spasm
or incipient paralysis; at the same time, _the heart trembled and
palpitated_ constantly under the oppressive feeling of inward burning,
which, in the most malignant cases, flew to the head, and excited fatal
delirium[698]. In the course of a short time, and in many cases at
the very commencement, the _stinking sweat_ broke out in streams over
the whole body, either proving salutary when life was able to obtain
the mastery over the disease, or prejudicial when it was subdued by
it—as is the case in every ineffectual effort of nature to produce a
cure. And in this respect, as in diseases of less importance, great
differences appeared according to the constitution of the patient;
for some perspired very easily, others, on the contrary, with great
difficulty, especially the phlegmatic, who, in consequence, were
threatened with the greatest danger[699].

In this severe struggle the _spinal marrow_ was sometimes, at a later
stage, so much affected, that even _convulsions_ came on; and it
happened not unfrequently, that, in consequence of the constriction
of the chest, the stomach indicated its excited condition by _nausea_
and _vomiting_[700]. These symptoms, however, manifested themselves
principally in those who were attacked with the disease upon a full
stomach.

Such is the testimony of the contemporary writers of 1529, to whose
accounts but little is added by Kaye, an English eye-witness of the
epidemic Sweating Sickness of 1551. The observations of this perfectly
trustworthy physician, so far as they relate to the form of the
disorder, may be here annexed, since no essential differences between
the diseases on these two occasions can be discovered. At the first
onset the disease in some attacked the neck or shoulders, and in others
one leg or one arm, with dragging pains[701]; others felt at the
same time a warm glow that spread itself over the limbs, immediately
after which, without any visible cause, the perspiration broke out,
accompanied by constant and increasing heat of the inward parts,
gradually extending towards the surface. The patients suffered from
a very _quick and irritable pulse_[702] and great thirst, and threw
themselves about in the utmost restlessness. Under the violent headache
which they suffered, they frequently fell into a talkative state of
wandering, yet this did not generally happen before the ninth hour,
and in very various gradations of mental aberration[703], after which
the drowsiness commenced. In others the sweating was longer delayed,
while, in the mean time, a slight rigor of the limbs existed: it then
broke out profusely, but did not always trickle down the skin in equal
abundance, but alternately, sometimes more, sometimes less. It was
thick and of various colours, but in all cases of a very disagreeable
odour[704], which, when it broke out again, after any interruption to
its flow, was still more penetrating[705].

Kaye adds to what we already know of the oppression of the chest, the
very important statement that those affected were observed to have
a _whining, sighing voice_, whence we have every reason to conclude
that there was a serious affection of the eighth pair of nerves. He,
moreover, describes a very mild form of the disease, such as was
prevalent in the south of Germany in 1529. It passed off under proper
care, without any danger, in the very short period of _fifteen hours_,
and was brought to a termination by moderate heat through the medium of
a very gentle perspiration[706].

It is remarkable that during this violent disorder neither the
_activity of the kidneys nor the evacuation by stool was entirely
interrupted_, for there passed continually turbid and dark urine,
although, as may be conceived, in small quantity and with great
uncertainty as to the prognosis; whereupon those physicians who judged
by the urine were not a little perplexed[707]. It was observed, too,
sometimes in the more easily curable cases, _that patients at the
moment when the perspiration broke out upon them passed urine in
great quantity_[708], on which account a French physician proposed to
draw off the water in those who suffered from this disease[709]; yet
this practice has no higher therapeutical worth than the excitement
of perspiration in diabetes or in cholera, and is, moreover, much
less practicable. That occasionally diarrhœa supervened, and even to
a degree which was not to be restrained, may be gathered from the
frequent medical directions as to how it ought to be arrested, which
Kaye also repeats[710]. In some patients, likewise, nature appears to
have effected a simultaneous crisis by the skin, the kidneys, and the
bowels.

Much more important, however, is the observation of a respectable Dutch
physician, that _after the perspiration was over_ there appeared on the
limbs _small vesicles_[711], which were not confluent, but rendered
the skin uneven, and these were not noticed by any other medical
observer, but are spoken of by the author of an old Hamburgh chronicle,
and, with this addition, that they had been seen on the dead[712]. By
these it is very likely that a _miliary eruption_, and perhaps spots
also, are to be understood; yet every thing militates against the
supposition that this phenomenon was constant, or that the Sweating
Fever was an eruptive disorder[713]. For in that case, some mention
would have been made of it in the numerous accounts of historians, many
of whom, doubtless, had themselves seen the disease, and the eruptions
would have been more evidently and decidedly formed in the numerous
relapses of those who recovered. They certainly indicate a relationship
with the miliary fever, but only in so far as that both diseases are
of rheumatic origin, and this slight participation in the nature of
an eruptive disease would seem to have been observed in the English
Sweating Sickness only in perfectly isolated cases. What would have
taken place under such an indication had the Sweating Sickness run a
longer course, whether, in fact, it might not possibly have passed
into a regular miliary fever, is a question unsolved by the past,
since even later transitions of this kind have never been observed.
The two diseases are, both in their course and their nature, perfectly
distinct from each other, and the miliary fever was not developed as an
independent epidemic until the following century, under circumstances
altogether different, and its more decided precursors are not to be
discovered until a period posterior to the five eruptions of the
Sweating Sickness.

The powers of the constitution were much shaken by the Sweating
Sickness, so that a rapid recovery was observed to take place only in
the mildest form of this disease. Those, however, whom it attacked more
severely, remained very feeble and powerless for at least a week, and
their restoration was but gradual, and effected only by great care and
strengthening diet. After the perspiration had passed off, the patient
was taken carefully from his bed, cautiously dried in a warm chamber,
placed by the fireside, and, as a first restorative, usually fed with
egg soup, yet the generality could not entirely get over the effects of
the fever for a long time. Those who had recovered could seldom go out
so early as the second or third day[714].

Those patients were placed in still greater danger _in whom the
perspiration was in any way suppressed_: most of them were consigned
to inevitable death, (the popular voice ever since the year 1485
confirms this.) Over those, however, in whom the powers of life were
roused to a renewed effort, there broke out, after a short period, a
new perspiration far more offensive than the first; so that the body
dripped as it were with a foul fluid, and it seemed as if the inward
parts wanted to disburthen themselves at once of their putridity by
an immoderate effort[715]. It is clear that this repetition of the
attack must have been destructive to many who, had it not been for
an obstruction of the crisis, would have been saved; for nothing is
more dangerous in inflammatory diseases than when those secretions are
interrupted which Nature has ordained as the only means of relief.

Relapses were frequent, because convalescents, after the disease was
subdued, remained for a long time very excitable. These were seen for
the _third and fourth time seized with the Sweating Sickness_[716],
nay, later writers notice _a repetition of the disease even to the
twelfth time_[717], whereby at least the health was completely
shattered, for dropsy or some other destructive sequelæ supervened,
until death put a period to incurable sufferings, and it is important
to observe that even the bowels participated in the great excitability
of the system, for _too early an exposure to the air easily brought on
diarrhœa_[718].

How great the decomposition of the organic matter was is convincingly
proved from all the testimony hitherto adduced, but it might have
been inferred from the very rapid putrefaction of the body, which
rendered it necessary everywhere to use the greatest despatch in the
performance of burials[719]; and fortunately did away with all fear of
being buried alive. Of post mortem examinations we have no information,
and even if they could have been instituted, they would, from the
manner of conducting researches in those times, scarcely have thrown
any important light on the disease. Hardly any physicians but those
who had studied in Italy knew the inward structure of the body from
their own observation, superficial as it was; the rest learned it
only from Galenic manuals; how could they with such slender knowledge
have distinguished between healthy and diseased parts? Moreover, the
Sweating Sickness could not in so short a period cause such a palpable
and substantial destruction of the viscera as they would alone have
sought for. Details respecting the condition of the blood in the dead
body, which after such an enormous loss of watery fluid, such severe
oppression at the chest, and so great an impediment to the function
of respiration, would in all probability be thickened and darkened in
colour, as well as respecting the condition of the lungs and of the
heart, it would be highly desirable to obtain; but these likewise are
wanting altogether, and after the lapse of so long a period there only
remains room for conjectures.

The observation was repeated in Germany which had been so frequently
made since the year 1485, that the middle period of life was especially
exposed to the Sweating Fever. Children, on the contrary, remained
almost entirely exempt from this disease, and when the aged were
affected by it, it was as individual exceptions to a general rule[720],
and this as it would appear, only during the height of the epidemic; as
for example at Zwickau, where a woman of 112 years of age was carried
off by it[721]. We have already in part discovered the cause of this
perfectly constant phenomenon in the luxurious mode of living of robust
young men, and if we look back to the moral condition of the Germans
in the 16th century, we find among them the same immoderate luxury
as among the English, the same drunkenness, the same intemperance at
their frequent banquets, where the wine-cups and beer-jugs were emptied
with but too eager draughts; finally, also, the same relaxation of
skin consequent upon the use of warm baths and warm clothing. All
contemporary writers mention these circumstances[722], and our bold
forefathers, with respect to these matters, were not in the best repute
with their southern neighbours.

But we have, moreover, to survey the disease in another point of
view, namely, in relation to its peculiar character. In the outset we
designated _the Sweating Sickness as a rheumatic fever_, and if we take
the notion of a rheumatic affection, as in propriety we ought, in its
widest acceptation, weighty and convincing grounds have been adduced
in the course of our whole inquiry in confirmation of this view. When
we observe that those very nations were visited by the Sweating Fever,
which are characterized by a fair skin, blue eyes, and light hair—the
marks of the German race, it may with justice be assumed, that even
this peculiarity in the structure of the body rendered it susceptible
of this extraordinary disease. It is this which causes the proneness
to fluxes of all kinds, and which makes these diseases endemic in the
north of Europe, whilst the dark-haired southern nations and the blacks
in the tropical climates remain, under similar circumstances[723], more
free from them. If it be remembered further how overcharged with water
were the lower strata of the atmosphere in which the pestilent Sweating
Fevers existed, what thick and even offensive mists prepared the way
for the disease and indicated its approach, what rapid alternations of
freezing cold and excessive heat took place in the summer of 1529; and,
moreover, how frequent all kinds of fluxes were in this very year, the
complete form of the rheumatic constitution will be recognised in every
individual feature.

Did we possess in the showy systems of modern times a maturer knowledge
of the electricity of living bodies, much light would of necessity
hence be thrown on the great object of our research. We should not
then be compelled to rest satisfied with the fact that a cloudy
atmosphere abstracts electricity from the body, robs the skin and
lungs of their electrical atmosphere, disturbs their mutual electrical
relation with the external world, and by this disturbance prepares the
body for rheumatic indisposition, with all that peculiar decomposition
of the fluids, irritable tension of the nerves, fever, and painful
affection of particular parts, with which it is accompanied. If this
disturbance be represented according to certain new and inviting
hypotheses, supported by some important facts[724], as being perhaps
an accumulation of electricity in the interior of the body, owing to a
morbid, isolating activity of the skin, we may expect a more perfect
knowledge of the nature of rheumatism through the medium of future
diligent researches; and until these be made, some evident signs
of connexion between rheumatic affections and the English Sweating
Sickness will perhaps be sufficient to demonstrate the rheumatic nature
of this latter disease.

In the first place, the very great _susceptibility of those affected
with the Sweating Fever to every change of temperature_—the decidedly
great danger of chill. In no known disease does this irritability of
the skin shew itself in so prominent a degree as in rheumatic fevers
and in those non-febrile fluxes in which there even exists a very
evident sensitiveness to _metallic_ action.

Secondly, _The tendency of the rheumatic diathesis to come to a crisis
through the medium of a profuse, sour and offensive perspiration_
without any assistance from art[725]. The English Sweating Sickness
manifests this commotion of the organism in the most exquisite form
hitherto known; for it admits of no kind of doubt that the sweat in
this disease was of itself, and in itself, critical, in the fullest
acceptation of the term.

Thirdly, _The peculiar alteration in the fundamental composition of
organic matter_ in rheumatic diseases, in consequence of which volatile
acids of a strange odour are prevalent in the sweat, and urine, and
animal excretions. The English Sweating Sickness exhibits also this
result of morbid activity in a greater and more striking manner than
any other disease. Nor can we regard the tendency to putridity, which
has been observed, as any thing but an increased degree of this
condition.

Fourthly, _The shooting pains in the limbs_, the most decided sign of
rheumatism, were not wanting in the English Sweating Sickness; nay,
they became developed even to the extent of an incipient paralysis,
and even the convulsions of those affected with this disease may not
unjustly be attributed to the same source.

Fifthly, _The tendency of rheumatism when it takes an unfavourable
course to pass into regular dropsy_, which is a consequence of the
peculiar decomposition, manifested itself in the Sweating Fever in so
marked a manner that the dropsy itself gradually destroyed the patient.

Should the sceptical still need another link in the comparison, we may
adduce the miliary fever, a disease of decidedly rheumatic character.
We must not, however, take as our standard the degenerate forms of
miliary fever existing in modern times, but those grand and fully
developed forms of the disease which occurred in the 17th and 18th
centuries, and in which we find a similar odour in the perspiration,
the same oppression, and the same inexpressible anguish, with
palpitation and restlessness. The arms became enfeebled as if seized
with paralysis, violent pains of the limbs set in, and unpleasant
pricking sensations in the fingers and toes, resembling in all these
particulars the Sweating Sickness, only pursuing a more lengthened and
irregular course, and becoming developed altogether in a different
manner.

_According to this representation, the English Sweating Sickness
appears as a rheumatic fever in the most exquisite form_ that has ever
yet been seen in the world, violently affecting the vitality of the
brain and spinal marrow with their nerves, without, however, at all
molesting the plexuses of the abdomen. _The immoderate excretion of
watery fluid_, which in the mild cases alone took place, through a
spontaneous curative power, while in the malignant forms it betokened
paralysis of the vessels and an actual colliquation, directs our
attention further to the _consequent state of inanition_, which very
probably passed into a _stagnation of the circulation_, in the same
manner as takes place after every other sudden loss of the fluids,
whether from sanguineous effusion or evacuations by vomit and stool.
Hence the uncommonly rapid course of the disease, and partly, too, the
fatal stupor[726]; hence, likewise, the very pardonable misconception
with respect to the nature of the Sweating Fever existing even in more
modern times. The sequela was more important and more fatal than the
original rheumatic affection itself, which in its minor forms was mild
and easily managed.

And thus is explained the wonderfully fortunate result of the old
English treatment, which prevented this sequela, and avoided increasing
the already too powerful efforts of nature to effect a cure. We
have, therefore, nothing further to add to this judicious and truly
scientific practice but our unqualified approbation; _for it is the
part of the physician, in diseases which have a spontaneous power of
curing themselves, to leave this power free scope to act, and merely
by fostering care to remove all obstacles to its exercise_. Should it
be the destiny of mankind to be again visited by the disease of the
sixteenth century, (and it is by no means impossible that at some time
or other similar events may recur,) we would recommend our posterity to
bear in mind this eternal truth, and to treasure up the golden words of
the Wittenberg pamphlet, namely, to guard the healing art from strange
and unnatural farragos, _for it is only when it is subordinate to
nature that it bears the stamp of reason—the mistress of all earthly
things_.





                FIFTH VISITATION OF THE DISEASE.—1551.

    “Ubique lugubris erat lamentatio, fletus mœrens, acerbus luctus.”

                                                                KAYE.



Full three and twenty years had now elapsed; no trace of the Sweating
Sickness had shewn itself anywhere in this long interval, and England
had by its rapid advancement assumed quite another aspect[727] when
the old enemy of that people again, and for the last time, burst
forth in Shrewsbury, the capital of Shropshire[728]. Here, during the
spring, there arose impenetrable fogs from the banks of the Severn,
which, from their unusually bad odour, led to a fear of their injurious
consequences[729]. It was not long before the Sweating Sickness
suddenly broke out on the 15th of April. To many it was entirely
unknown or but obscurely recollected; for, amidst the commotions of
Henry’s reign, the old malady had long since been forgotten.

The visitation was so very general in Shrewsbury and the places in its
neighbourhood, that every one must have believed that the atmosphere
was poisoned, for no caution availed, no closing of the doors and
windows, every individual dwelling became an hospital, and the aged
and the young, who could contribute nothing towards the care of their
relatives, alone remained unaffected by the pestilence[730]. The
disease came as unexpectedly and as completely without all warning
as it had ever done on former occasions; at table, during sleep, on
journeys, in the midst of amusement, and at all times of the day;
and so little had it lost of its old malignity, that in a few hours
it summoned some of its victims from the ranks of the living, and
even destroyed others in less than one[731]. _Four and twenty hours_,
neither more nor less, _were decisive as to the event_; the disease had
thus undergone no change.

In proportion as the pestilence increased in its baneful violence, the
condition of the people became more and more miserable and forlorn; the
townspeople fled to the country, the peasants to the towns; some sought
lonely places of refuge, others shut themselves up in their houses.
Ireland and Scotland received crowds of the fugitives. Others embarked
for France or the Netherlands; but security was nowhere to be found; so
that people at last resigned themselves to that fate which had so long
and heavily oppressed the country. Women ran about negligently clad, as
if they had lost their senses, and filled the streets with lamentations
and loud prayers; all business was at a stand; no one thought of his
daily occupations, and the funeral bells tolled day and night, as
if all the living ought to be reminded of their near and inevitable
end[732]. There died, within a few days, nine hundred and sixty of the
inhabitants of Shrewsbury, the greater part of them robust men and
heads of families; from which circumstance we may judge of the profound
sorrow that was felt in this city.



The epidemic spread itself rapidly over all England, as far as the
Scottish borders, and on all sides to the sea coasts, under more
extraordinary and memorable phenomena than had been observed in almost
any other epidemic. In fact, it seemed that _the banks of the Severn
were the focus of the malady_, and that from hence, a true impestation
of the atmosphere was diffused in every direction. Whithersoever the
winds wafted the stinking mist, the inhabitants became infected with
the Sweating Sickness, and, more or less, the same scenes of horror and
of affliction which had occurred in Shrewsbury were repeated. These
poisonous clouds of mist were observed moving from place to place,
with the disease in their train, affecting one town after another,
and morning and evening spreading their nauseating insufferable
stench[733]. At greater distances, these clouds being dispersed by the
wind, became gradually attenuated, yet their dispersion set no bounds
to the pestilence, and it was as if they had imparted to the lower
strata of the atmosphere a kind of ferment which went on engendering
itself, even without the presence of the thick misty vapour, and
being received into men’s lungs, produced the frightful disease
everywhere[734]. Noxious exhalations from dung-pits, stagnant waters,
swamps, impure canals, and the odour of foul rushes, which were in
general use in the dwellings in England, together with all kinds of
offensive rubbish, seemed not a little to contribute to it; and it was
remarked universally, that wherever such offensive odours prevailed,
the Sweating Sickness appeared more malignant[735]. It is a known fact,
that in a certain state of the atmosphere, which is perhaps principally
dependent on electrical conditions and the degree of heat, mephitic
odours exhale more easily and powerfully. To the quality of the air
at that time prevalent in England, this peculiarity may certainly be
attributed, although it must be confessed, that upon this point there
are no accurate data to be discovered.

The disease lasted upon the whole almost half a year, namely, _from
the 15th of April to the 30th of September_[736]; it thus passed
but gradually from place to place, and we do not observe here, that
it spread with that rapidity, which, in the autumn of 1529, had
excited such great wonder in Germany. It is much to be regretted,
that contemporary writers either gave no intelligence respecting the
irruption or course of the epidemic Sweating Sickness in individual
towns, or, if they did so, that this has not been made use of by
subsequent writers. Doubtless, a very considerable diversity of
circumstances would here present themselves, and the very peculiar
manner in which the corruption of the atmosphere spread on this
occasion, might perhaps have been estimated from certain facts, and
not from mere suppositions. Thus the only fact that has been handed
down is very remarkable; namely, that the Sweating Sickness required a
whole quarter of a year to traverse the short distance from Shrewsbury
to London; for it did not break out there until the 9th of July, and
in a few days, according to its former mode, reached its height, so
that the rapid increase of deaths excited terror throughout the whole
city[737]. Yet the mortality was considerably less than at Shrewsbury,
for there died in the whole of the first week only eight hundred
inhabitants[738], and we may consider it decided, although all the
contemporaries are silent on this very essential question, that the
pestilence nowhere lasted longer than fifteen days, and perhaps in most
places, as formerly, only five or six.

The deaths throughout the kingdom were very numerous, so that one
historian actually calls it a depopulation[739]. No rank of life
remained exempt, but the Sweating Sickness raged with equal violence
in the foul huts of the poor and in the palaces of the nobility[740].
The piety which, in the general dejection, was displayed by the whole
nation, giving birth to innumerable works of Christian benevolence
and philanthropy, whereby undoubtedly many tears were dried up—many
orphans and widows protected from distress and want, is hence
explained: for this phenomenon, highly delightful as it is in itself,
occurs only under great afflictions and a general fear of death, as
we are taught by the universal history of epidemics. We are willing
to believe, to the honour of the English, that the religious impulse
which they derived from their ecclesiastical reformation, may have
had no small share in its production; yet, unfortunately, such is
the nature of human society, that no sooner is the calamity over,
than virtue relaxes. Scarcely were the funeral obsequies performed,
when every thing returned to the usual routine[741]; in like manner,
the Byzantines once, during a great earthquake, were seized with a
fear of God, such as they had never before felt; day and night they
flocked to the churches; nothing was to be seen but Christian virtue,
self-denial, and works of benevolence, but these only lasted until the
earth again became firm[742].

The very remarkable observation was made in this year, _that the
Sweating Sickness uniformly spared foreigners in England, and, on the
other hand, followed the English into foreign countries_, so that those
who were in the Netherlands and France, and even in Spain, were carried
off in no inconsiderable numbers by their indigenous pestilence, which
was nowhere caught by the natives.

Not a single French inhabitant[743] of the neighbouring town of Calais
was affected, and neither the Scotch inhabitants of the same island,
nor the Irish, were visited by the Sweating Sickness, so that we cannot
get rid of the notion, that there was some peculiarity in the whole
constitution of the English which rendered them exclusively susceptible
of this disease. To make this out accurately would be so much the more
difficult, because, in the original year of the Sweating Sickness,
foreigners were the very persons among whom the English disease broke
out; and again, because English persons who had lived a year in France,
on their return home in the summer of 1551, became the subjects of
Sweating Sickness[744]. Contemporaries, indeed, find a cause in the
gluttony and rude mode of life of the English. In short, in all those
remote causes with which we have already become acquainted, and which,
doubtless, also had their part in preparing the same scourge for the
Germans and Flemings in 1529. Kaye, the most efficient eye-witness,
even brings in proof of this view, that the temperate in England
remained exempt from the Sweating Sickness, and on the contrary, that
some Frenchmen at Calais, who were too much devoted to English manners,
were seized with it[745]. To this alone, however, this susceptibility
cannot be attributed, unless we would be content with the antiquated
system of giving too much weight to remote causes, opposed to which we
are met by the striking fact, that the Germans and Netherlanders, who
had scarcely much improved in their manners since 1529, were not again
visited by their old enemy.



It is easy to perceive, or rather we have no alternative but to
suppose, an unknown something in the English atmosphere, which
imparted to the inhabitants the rheumatic diathesis, or, if we will,
so penetrated their bodies, overcharged as they were with crude
juices[746], that their constitutions had the so-called _opportunity_,
that is, were changed in such a manner as to fit them for the reception
of the Sweating Sickness. Under such a condition, the common and more
peculiar causes of this disease were not absolutely necessary, in order
to induce its attack in a constitution thus long prepared for it, but
the general causes of disease were sufficient of themselves to give it
its last stimulus, although this should be in an entirely different
climate, as in the present instance was the case with the English who
were living in Spain, and with the Venetian ambassador _Naugerio_, who,
in the year 1528, fell ill of the petechial fever, when far from Italy,
and living in France[747].

It has, no doubt, struck the reader that each of the five eruptions
in England lasted much longer than the single one which occurred
in Germany and the north of Europe. This, too, might well depend
upon peculiarities in the English soil. But let us now endeavour
to render manifest, by means of phenomena actually observed, that
unknown something in the atmosphere of 1551, the θεῖον of the great
Hippocrates, which announces its presence by the sickening of the
people; for beyond this it is not granted that human researches should
penetrate. The winter of 1550–51 was dry and warm in England; the
spring dry and cold; the summer and autumn hot and moist[748]. The
weather of the whole year was uncommon in many particulars, without,
however, influencing the lives of plants and animals so much or
through so great a range as at the time of the fourth epidemic of
Sweating Sickness. It was even in some places praised as fruitful[749].
On the 10th of January a violent tempest occurred, which in Germany
left no small traces[750] of its effects on houses and towers. The
same day brought considerable floods in the river district of the
Lahn, which must be noticed on account of the very unusual season of
the year[751]. On the 13th of January, again at an unusual season,
there followed a great storm with heavy rains[752], which spread over
the north of Germany; and on the 28th of January there occurred a
considerable earthquake in Lisbon, whereby about two hundred houses
were overthrown, and nearly a thousand people were destroyed; whilst
a fiery meteor appeared, which, according to the unsatisfactory
descriptions of the time, resembled most a northern light, and
therefore was, in all probability, of electrical origin[753]. This
was succeeded in Germany by a great frost in February[754]. On the
21st of March, at seven o’clock in the morning, two mock suns, with
three rainbows, were seen at Magdeburg and in its vicinity, and in the
evening two mock moons[755]. The same mock suns were also observed at
Wittenberg, but without the rainbows. A similar phenomenon with two
rainbows was again seen on the 27th of March[756]; and mock suns had
been observed at Antwerp as early as the 28th of February[757]. About
the same time (21st of March) the Oder overflowed its banks[758],
and floods followed after continued rains during the month of May in
Thuringia and Franconia[759]. Great tempests were not wanting[760],
and, after considerable heat, there occurred, on the 26th of June,
a thick summer fog in the districts of the Elbe which deprived the
besiegers of Magdeburg of the sight of that city. It may, therefore, be
supposed that this phenomenon took place throughout a greater extent
of country[761]. On the 22nd of September a meteor, like a northern
light, was again seen, and on the 29th of that month, after some clear
weather, a heavy fall of snow was followed by continued cold[762].

These facts are sufficient plainly to prove that the course of the
year 1551 was unusual, that the atmosphere was overcharged with water,
and that the electrical conditions of it were considerably disturbed;
nor must we omit to notice that, for the first time since 1547, mould
spots again appeared in Germany on clothes, and red discolorations of
water, as likewise an exuberance of the lowest cryptogamic species of
vegetation[763].



During the years of scarcity, from 1528 to 1534, it excited general
surprise that malignant fevers, more especially the plague, petechial
fever, and encephalitis, which in the individual accounts we can seldom
sufficiently distinguish from each other, were constantly recurring,
and, creeping slowly as they did from place to place, had no sooner
finished their wandering visitations of whole districts of country,
than they again made their appearance where they had broken out in
former years[764]. It was _a century of putrid malignant affections_,
in which typhous diseases were continually prevailing—a century replete
with grand phenomena affecting human life in general, and continuing
so, long after the period to which our researches refer.

There existed also an epidemic flux which, during a cold summer[765]
in 1538, spread over a great part of Europe, and especially over
France, so that, according to the assurance of an eminent physician,
there was scarcely any town exempt from it[766]. Of this flux we have
unfortunately but very defective reports, among which we find a
statement, not without importance, that there were no extraordinary
forerunners, such as are observed in phenomena of this kind, to
account for this epidemic[767]. Two years earlier, however, (12th of
July 1536,) Erasmus died of the flux[768]. This disease seldom occurs
sporadically, but usually as an epidemic, and thus, perhaps slighter
visitations of this rheumatic malady may be assumed to have preceded
that greater one which took place in 1538.

A period remarkable for plague followed in the year 1540, and ended
about 1543. The summer of the first named year is especially mentioned
in the chronicles as having been _hot_, and throughout the whole
century it continued to be in great repute on account of the excellent
wine it produced[769]. A spontaneous conflagration of the woods
was frequent, and an earthquake was felt in Germany on the 14th of
December[770]. Thereupon, in 1541, there followed in Constantinople
a great plague[771] which, in the year 1542, spread by means of a
Turkish invasion into Hungary, its superior importance being indicated
by the presence of accompanying phenomena, among which the swarms of
locusts that appeared this year are especially worthy of note. They
came from the interior of Asia, and travelled in dense masses over
Europe, passing northward over the Elbe[772], and southward as far as
Spain[773]. Kaye saw a cloud of locusts of this description in Padua;
their passage lasted full two hours, and they extended further than the
eye could reach[774]. The plague quickly spread in Hungary and caused
a similar destruction to the imperial army, which was fighting against
the Turks under Joachim the Second, Elector of Brandenburg, as it had
formerly caused the French before Naples[775]. Whether this pestilence
may have been the original oriental glandular plague, or whether we may
assume that it had already degenerated into the _Hungarian Petechial
Fever_, such as likewise broke out in the year 1566, in the camp near
Komorn, during the campaign of Maximilian the Second, and thence, by
means of the disbanded lansquenets, spread in all directions[776],
cannot now well be determined for want of ascertained facts. In the
following year, 1543, however, this plague broke out in Germany,
namely, in the Harz districts in the provinces of the Saale[777], and
still more malignantly at Metz[778], yet upon the whole it did not
cause any considerable loss of life.

In the years 1545 and 1546 we again find the _Trousse-galant_ in
France[779]. It proved fatal to the Duke of Orleans, second son of
Francis the First, in the neighbourhood of Boulogne, and, according to
the testimony of French historians, to ten thousand English in that
fort, so that the garrison was obliged to pitch a camp outside the
town, and the reluctant reinforcements felt that they were encountering
certain death[780]. The disease spread itself also among the French
troops, and we have seen that it extended its dominion beyond the Alps
of Savoy[781].

It thus appears, that, up to the period of which we have been speaking,
the year 1544 alone was free from great visitations of disease, but
it would be difficult from thenceforth satisfactorily to define the
individual groups of epidemics, if the connexion of the epidemic
Sweating Sickness of the year 1551 with them is to be made out; for
there was, to use an expression of the schools, a continued _typhous
constitution_, which extended throughout this whole period, manifesting
itself on the slightest causes by malignant diseases; so that the
visitations of sickness which we have hitherto been describing do but
appear as exacerbations of them, with a predominance sometimes of one
and sometimes of another set of symptoms.

The camp fever, which prevailed in the spring of 1547 among the
imperial troops, there is good ground for considering to have been
petechial. A great many soldiers fell sick of it, and it was so much
the more malignant because the imperial army was composed of a variety
of soldiery, Spaniards, Germans, Hungarians, and Bohemians. Those who
were seized complained, as in encephalitis, of insufferable heat of
the head, their eyes were swollen and started glistening from their
sockets, their offensive breath poisoned the atmosphere around them,
their tongues were covered with a brown crust, they vomited bile, their
skin was of a leaden hue, and a deep purple eruption broke forth upon
it. The disease, the fresh seeds of which the imperial hussars had
brought with them out of Hungary, proved fatal as early as the second
or third day, and it may be taken for granted, that both before and
after the battle of Muhlberg (24th of April) it made no small ravages
in Saxony[782]; yet it did not become general.

After a short interval the unusual phenomena of 1549 again increased;
the chronicles of central Germany record blights and murrains in that
year. They speak likewise of a northern light seen on the 21st of
September, and of a malignant disease which, till the winter set in,
carried off young people in no small numbers[783]. According to all
appearance this disease was a petechial fever, which in the following
year, 1550, likewise visited the March of Brandenburg, Thuringia and
Saxony[784]. The mortality was particularly great at Eisleben, where,
in less than four weeks from the 14th September, 257 fell a sacrifice
to it, and after this period it happened often that from twenty to
twenty-four bodies were buried in one day; so that the loss in this
little town may be reckoned at least at 500[785]. From this slight
example the great malignity of the plagues of the sixteenth century
will be perceived, and it would be still more evident if the physicians
of those times had made more careful observations, and historians had
more accurately recorded facts of this kind.

In 1551 there prevailed in Swabia a disease of the nature of plague,
which determined the Duke Christoph, of Würtemburg, to withdraw
himself from Stuttgard. It did not spread, and seems to have remained
unknown to the rest of Germany[786]. In Spain, too, the plague[787]
shewed itself, and if to this be added the influenza of the same
year[788], as well as the numerous cases of malignant fevers in Germany
and Switzerland, which were spoken of as still existing in the two
following years[789], it will again be seen quite evidently that _the
fifth epidemic Sweating Sickness_ _appeared, accompanied by a group of
various epidemic diseases, which might be considered as resulting from
general influences_. The disease which is the subject of our research
thus took its departure from Europe similarly accompanied as when it
originally sprang up there, while in the interval it thrice repeated
its deadly attacks.



Let us dedicate a few moments to the observer of the fifth sweating
pestilence, whose life presents a lively image of the peculiarities and
tendencies of his age. He was born at Norwich on the 6th of October,
1510, and received his education at Gonville Hall, Cambridge. He had
early evinced by some productions his great knowledge of the Greek
language, and his zeal for theological investigations. At a maturer
age he went to Italy, at that time the seat of scientific learning,
where _Baptista Montanus_ and _Vesalius_, at Padua, initiated him in
the healing art. He took his Doctor’s degree at Bologna, and in 1542 he
lectured on Aristotle in conjunction with Realdus Columbus, with great
approbation. The following year he travelled throughout Italy, and with
much diligence collated manuscripts for the emendation of Galen and
Celsus, attended the prælections of Matthæus Curtius at Pisa, and then
returned through France and Germany to his own country.

After being admitted as a doctor of medicine at Cambridge, he practised
with great distinction at Shrewsbury and Norwich, but was soon summoned
by Henry the Eighth to deliver anatomical lectures to the surgeons in
London. He was much honoured at the court of Edward the Sixth, and the
appointment of body physician, which this monarch bestowed on him, he
retained also under Queen Mary and Elizabeth. In 1547, he became a
Fellow of the College of Physicians, over which, at a later period,
he presided for seven years. He constantly supported the honour of
this body with great zeal, compiled its Annals from the period of
its foundation by Linacre to the end of his own presidentship, and
originated an establishment, the first of the kind in England[790], for
annually performing two public dissections of human bodies.

That he was thus established in London before the year 1551 is certain,
yet he was present in Shrewsbury, during the Sweating Sickness. His
pamphlet[791] upon this disease, the first and last published in
England, did not, however, appear before 1552, after all was over. It
is written in strong language and a popular style, and with a laudable
frankness; for Kaye blames in it, without any reserve, the gross
mode of living of his countrymen, and does not fatigue his reader
with too much book learning, which neither he nor his contemporaries
could refrain from displaying on other occasions. He reserved this
for the Latin version of his pamphlet, which was published four years
later[792], and although, judged according to a modern standard, it is
far from being satisfactory, yet it contains an abundance of valuable
matter, and proves its author to be a good observer; and in this we
can nowhere mistake that he is an Englishman of the sixteenth century,
however numerous the terms he may borrow from Celsus. His doctrines
are of the old Greek school throughout, of which the physicians of
those times were staunch supporters; hence the term _ephemera[793]
pestilens_, his comparison of the disease with the similar fevers of
the ancients[794], and his accurate appreciation of the important
doctrine of æthereal spirits, to which he refers its chief causes,
and, according to which, the corrupted atmosphere (spiritus corrupti)
becomes mixed in the lungs with the spirits of blood, (spiritus
sanguinis,) whence it at once appears explicable to him, why many
persons may be attacked with the Sweating Sickness at the same time,
and even in different places, and why the parts of the body in which,
according to the ancient Greek notion, the æthereal spirits developed
themselves, were most violently affected with this disease[795]. From
the relationship of the infected air to the æthereal spirits in the
body, polluted by intemperance, it also appears explicable to him, why
foreigners in England, in whom this pollution took place in a less
degree, were, only in cases of individual exception, attacked by the
Sweating Sickness[796], not to mention other theoretical notions.

On malaria in general, as he was an observant naturalist, he was
enabled to turn to good account his experience in Italy and his
knowledge of the ancients, and his estimation of the subordinate
causes, with regard to which he takes up the same position as Agricola,
who was also a good naturalist, is likewise on the whole worthy of
approbation[797]. The immoderate use of beer, amongst the English, was
considered by many as the principal reason why the Sweating Sickness
was confined to this nation. On this subject he enlarges even to
prolixity, with evident English predilection for this beverage which
manifestly contributed to the morbid repletion of the people; and
he himself acknowledged this as a principal cause of the Sweating
Sickness. The injurious quality of salt-fish, as alleged by Erasmus
and the German physician Hellwetter[798], he would not altogether have
ventured to reject[799], for it caused constant and abundant fetid
perspirations, and might thus have contributed to pave the way for the
Sweating Sickness. A similar source was to be found in the dirty rush
floors in the English houses[800], and other subordinate causes of the
disease of which mention has been made in the course of this treatise.

As a zealous advocate of temperance, it were to be wished that he had
met with more attention; but the words of a good physician are given
to the winds, when they are directed against vices and habits of
sensual indulgence; people require from him an infallible preservative,
and not a lecture on morality. His precepts on food and beverage are
circumstantial, after the manner of the ancients, and he recommends
such a variety, that it is difficult to make a choice; while nothing
but the greatest simplicity can be of any avail. _Purifying fires_,
which were kindled everywhere in times of plague, are also much
lauded by him, and we here learn incidentally, that the smiths and
cooks remained free[801] from the Sweating Sickness. Fumigations with
odoriferous substances of all kinds, even the most costly Indian
spices, were everywhere employed in the houses of the rich, and no one
stirred out without having with him some one of the thousand scents
recommended from time immemorial during the plague. The medicines which
he recommends are those that were then in vogue; among which Theriaca,
Armenian Bole, and Pearls, occur in various combinations, yet most of
the prophylactics which he advises for obviating any defect in the
constitution are not very violent.

Kaye’s treatment of the Sweating Sickness is according to the mild old
English plan, which is very judiciously and perspicuously laid down.
He kept himself, on the whole, free from the influence of the schools
in this instance, and the only remedy which he approved in case of
necessity, was a harmless and very favourite preparation of pearls and
odoriferous substances, which was called Manus Christi[802], or, in
Germany, sugar of pearls. It had its origin in the fifteenth century,
and was the invention of _Guainerus_[803], and there were various
receipts for compounding it[804]. He also sometimes prescribed, at
the commencement of the attack[805], bole or terra sigillata, for how
could a physician of the sixteenth century doubt the antipoisonous
effect of this overrated remedy? Restlessness in the patient, debility,
a too thick skin, and thick blood, are set forth by him as the chief
impediments to the critical sweat, and in order to remove them, he
sets to work with great and laudable caution, ordering, according to
circumstances, even mulled wine and greater warmth. Sometimes, too,
he could not refrain from employing Theriac and Mithridate, but he
did not use these remedies to any great extent. For dropsical and
rheumatic patients who became the subjects of the Sweating Sickness,
he prescribed a beverage of Guaiacum; he also recommended as a
sudorific, the China root, which was at that time much in use. When
the perspiration broke out, he positively prohibited the urging it
beyond the proper point; all medicines were thence laid aside, and he
trusted to aromatic vinegar and gentle succussion alone for keeping off
the lethargy, without considering, with _Damianus_, that more severe
measures were essential[806].

As a learned patron of the sciences, Kaye ranks amongst the most
distinguished men of his country. Through his interest, Gonville Hall
was, in the reign of _Queen Mary_, elevated to the rank of a college,
better established, and more richly endowed. To the end of his life,
he continued to preside[807] over this his favourite institution,
and passed his old age[808] there, not in Monkish contemplation,
like Linacre, but zealously devoted to study, as the great number of
his writings testifies. He was accused of having changed his faith
according to circumstances. This pliability served, it is true,
to retain him in favour with sovereigns of very opposite modes of
thinking: it is not, however, a sign of elevation of mind, and can only
be explained in part by the spirit of the English Reformation. _Kaye_
was a reformer in fact, inasmuch as he was a promoter of instruction,
and, perhaps, laid no stress on outward profession. His versatility
as a scholar is extraordinary, and would be worthy of the highest
admiration, had he entirely avoided the reproach of credulity, had
he not been too prolix in subordinate matters, and had he shown more
decided signs of genius. At one time he translated and illustrated the
writings of Galen; at another, he wrote on philology or the medical
art—it must be confessed, without much originality, for he took _Galen_
and _Montanus_ as his patterns[809]. But where could physicians
be found at that time who did not follow established doctrines?
Some essays on History and English Archæology are found among his
writings[810]; and his works on Natural History[811], dedicated to
Conrad Gesner, are among the best of his age, because he imparted
his observations in them quite plainly and naturally, free from the
trammels of any school. He died at Cambridge on the 29th of July, 1573,
and ordered for himself the following epitaph-“Fui Caius.”





                         SWEATING SICKNESSES.

    Ἔστι γὰρ τὸ πάθος λύσις τῶν δεσμῶν τῆς εἰς ζωὴν δυνάμιος.

                                                             ARETÆUS.



                          (MORBUS CARDIACUS.)

Thus by the autumn of 1551, the Sweating Sickness had vanished from
the earth: it has never since appeared as it did then and at earlier
periods; and it is not to be supposed, that it will ever again
break forth as a great epidemic in the same form, and limited to a
four-and-twenty hours’ course; for it is manifest, that the mode of
living of the people had a great share in its origin; and this will
never again be the same as in those days. Yet nature is not wanting
in similar phenomena, which have appeared in ancient and modern
times; and if we take into the account the great frequency of cognate
rheumatic maladies, it is possible that isolated cases may have
sometimes occurred, in which repletion of impure fluids, and violently
inflammatory treatment have augmented a rheumatic fever, even to the
destruction of nervous vitality, by means of profuse perspiration—only,
perhaps, that they ran a longer course, (which does not constitute
an essential difference,) and under totally different names, whereby
attention is misled. Of all the diseases that have ever appeared
which can in any way be compared to the English Sweating Sickness, we
have principally three to look back upon—the _cardiac disease_ of the
ancients, the _Picardy sweat_, and the _sweating fever of Rötingen_.
The first was, for reasons which have been already mentioned[812],
almost unknown to the learned of the sixteenth century; and it is
matter of surprise, that Kaye himself, who had chosen for his favourite
the best Roman physician, we mean Celsus, could have so entirely
overlooked his by no means unimportant statements respecting this
disease. _Houlier_ is the only author who ventures a comparison of the
English Sweating Sickness with the ancient cardiac disease; his few,
and almost lost words[813], remained however unheeded; nor are the
differences between the two diseases small: but to return.

The disease of which we are speaking appeared for a period of 500
years, (from 300 B.C. to 200 after Christ,) and was a common, almost
every day occurrence, which is often mentioned even by non-medical
writers. It was exceedingly dangerous, and even esteemed fatal; and
as it was far above the reach of Greek physiology, there were not
wanting extraordinary opinions respecting its nature, and bold and
singular modes of treatment, to which those who were attacked were
subjected. The name _Cardiac disease_ (morbus cardiacus, νόσος καρδιακὴ
and probably also νόσος καρδίτις,) was not bestowed by medical men,
but by the people; who, in the fourth century before Christ, for the
name is as ancient as that period, could not know that the learned
would dispute on that subject. Some affirmed, and among them men of
great authority, such as _Erasistratus_, _Asclepiades_, and _Aretæus_,
that the people were in the right so to call the disease; that the
heart was actually the part affected, and that their knowledge of the
heart’s functions was by no means small[814]. Others, on the contrary,
would only acknowledge in that name an expression indicative, not
of the particular seat of the disease, but only of its importance,
inasmuch as the heart is well adapted, as the centre and source of
life, to indicate this[815]. Others again, who attempted more refined
conjectures, wished to represent the pericardium as the seat of the
malady, because darting pains were sometimes felt[816] in the region
of the heart, or the diaphragm, or the lungs, or even the liver. The
opinions were numerous; the actual knowledge was small[817].

The cardiac disease began with rigors and a numbness in the
limbs[818], and sometimes even throughout the whole body. The
pulse then took on the worst condition, was small, weak, frequent,
empty, and as if dissolving; in a more advanced stage, unequal and
fluttering, until it became completely extinct. Patients were affected
with hallucinations[819]; they were sleepless, despaired of their
recovery, and were usually covered suddenly with an ill-savoured
perspiration over the whole body, whence the disorder was likewise
called _Diaphoresis_. Sometimes, however, a washy sweat broke out,
first on the face and neck. This then spread itself over the whole
body; assumed a very disagreeable odour, became clammy and like water
in which flesh had been macerated, and ran through the bed-clothes in
streams, so that the patient seemed to be melting away[820]. The breath
was short and panting almost to annihilation (insustentabilis). Those
affected were in continual fear of suffocation[821]; tossed to and fro
in the greatest anguish, and with _a very thin and trembling voice_
uttered forth only broken words. They constantly felt an insufferable
oppression in the _left side_, or even over the whole chest[822]; and
in the paroxysms which were ushered in with _a fainting fit_, or were
followed by one, _the heart was tumultuous and palpitated_, without
any alteration in the smallness of the pulse[823]. The countenance was
_pale as death_, the eyes sunk in their sockets, and when the disease
took a fatal turn, all was darkness around them. _The hands and feet
turned blue_; and whilst the heart, notwithstanding the universal
coldness of the body, still beat violently, they for the most part
retained possession of their senses. A few only wandered a short
time before death, while others were even seized with convulsions
and endowed with the power of prophecy[824]. _Finally, the nails
became curved on their cold hands_, the skin was wrinkled, and thus
the sufferers resigned their spirit without any mitigation of their
miserable condition[825].

A striking resemblance is plainly perceived, from this description,
between the ancient cardiac disease and the English Sweating Sickness
in the most exquisite cases of each. In both the same palpitation of
the heart, the same alteration of the voice, the same anxiety, the
same impediment to respiration, and thence the same affection of the
nerves of the chest, the same ill-scented sweat, and, by means of
this sweat, the same fatal evacuation; in short, all the essential
symptoms arising from the same circle of functions. For in the sweating
pestilences of the ancients[826], as well as the moderns, the nerves of
the abdomen remained unaffected; the liver, intestines, and kidneys,
took no part in the primary affection; the diaphragm, as in the English
Sweating Sickness, formed the partition. Hence the acute _Aretæus_ did
not hesitate to call the cardiac disease _fainting_ (syncope), with
certainly an unusual extension of the notion implied by this term,
which in its common acceptation excludes the turbulent commotion of the
heart. In the affection of the brain some difference occurs, for though
the hallucination afforded an unfavourable prognostic in both diseases,
yet the fatal stupor was peculiar to the English Sweating Sickness, no
observer having made mention of it in the cardiac disease.

Greater and altogether essential differences between this affection
and the English Sweating Sickness appear in another respect. There
is every reason to suppose that the cardiac disease first appeared
in the time of _Alexander_ the Great, that is to say, at the end of
the fourth century before Christ; for the Hippocratic physicians
were unacquainted with it, _Erasistratus_, who was body physician
to Seleucus Nicator, and was a universally celebrated professor at
Alexandria under the first Ptolemy, being the first to mention it. If
that age be compared even superficially with that of Henry the VIIth
and Henry the VIIIth; and Africa, Asia Minor, and the South of Europe
with England, we shall easily be convinced that the two diseases,
notwithstanding the agreement in their main symptoms, could not be
the same; moreover, much was comprehended by the ancients under the
name of morbus cardiacus, which, on a nearer examination, proves not
to be one and the same definite form of morbid action: for sometimes
this affection is spoken of as an independent disease; sometimes it
is mentioned only as a symptom superadded to others—as a kind of
transition from other very various diseases, such as has occurred in
modern times. _Soranus_ mentions, as such diseases, continued fevers,
accompanied by much heat[827]; and reckons among them the “Causus,”
that is, an inflammatory bilious fever, to which _Aretæus_ also saw
the cardiac disease superadded. These fevers passed, on the fifth or
sixth day, into the cardiac disease, and such a transition occurred
chiefly on the critical days[828]. In a similar sense _Celsus_ speaks
even of _Phrenitis_, under which name we are here to understand all
inflammatory fevers accompanied by violent delirium, with the exception
of actual inflammation of the brain. Thus we see that the cardiac
disease arose and increased on a very different soil from other
diseases, and was, to furnish an ancient example, as far from being
independent under these circumstances as _lethargy_ was in similar
cases.

But there was doubtless an independent idiopathic form of the cardiac
disease. Whether this was febrile or not, the most celebrated
physicians of ancient times were not agreed. Now, how could they ever
have differed upon the subject, if the cardiac disease had always
appeared only as a sequela on the fifth or sixth day of inflammatory
fevers? _Apollophanes_, a disciple of Erasistratus, and physician to
_Antiochus the First_, considered it, with his master, as constantly
febrile, and his opinion prevailed for a long time: perhaps he was
in the right, for it is probable that in the first half of the third
century, the disorder was much more violent than at a subsequent
period. His celebrated contemporary, _Demetrius_ of Apamea, disciple
of Herophilus, affirmed, that he had recognised fever only in the
beginning of the disease, and that it disappeared in its further
progress. Very soon, most physicians decided that it was not febrile,
but _Asclepiades_ distinguished a febrile and a non-febrile form of
the cardiac disease, and it is certain that this physician was a very
accurate observer. _Themison_ and _Thessalus_ also agreed with him.
_Aretæus_ described, in a cursory manner, the febrile form only, and
perhaps was not acquainted with any other. _Soranus_ followed, in the
essential points, _Asclepiades_, the founder of his school; and later
writers generally regarded the inward heat, the hot breath, and the
burning thirst—symptoms which were occasionally less marked, as proofs
of the febrile nature of the disease. Numerous theoretical views,
belonging to particular schools, of which we do not here treat, were
intermingled with these, and upon the whole, that form seems to have
been esteemed as non-febrile, in which the signs of feverish excitement
appeared less marked. In all cases the cardiac disease set in with
external coldness, and with a small contracted quick pulse, symptoms
which with certainty indicate fever[829].

Respecting the course of the cardiac disease, we are not furnished with
sufficient information. It was no doubt very rapid, for the frame could
not long endure symptoms of so violent a kind, and the disorder must of
necessity soon have come to a crisis; yet from the ample directions for
treatment, we may conclude that it lasted at least some days. If the
perspiration was well surmounted, patients seemed to recover rapidly,
and their sufferings appeared to them, according to the expressions of
_Aretæus_, like a dream, out of which they awoke to a consciousness of
the increased acumen of their senses[830]. But the termination was not
always so fortunate. The disease was very dangerous, and in many, after
the occurrence of an incomplete crisis, an insidious fever remained
behind, which ended in a consumption[831]. The whole phenomenon was
altogether peculiar, and among existing diseases there are none which
bear any comparison with it.

There must therefore have been something in the whole state of
existence among the ancients which favoured the formation of the
cardiac disease. That it arose oftener in summer than in winter, that
it attacked men more frequently than women, and especially young people
full of life, and hot-blooded plethoric persons, who used much bodily
exercise, we learn from credible observers[832]. In this respect,
therefore, it bore a resemblance to the English Sweating Sickness. We
may also add, that indigestion, repletion, drunkenness, as likewise
grief and fear, but especially vomiting and the employment of the bath
after dinner, occasioned an attack of the malady[833]. Let us call to
mind the habits of the ancients. It was in the time of _Alexander_ that
oriental luxury was first introduced. Gluttony became a part of the
enjoyment of life, and warm baths a necessary refinement in sensuality,
which just at this time were philosophically established by _Epicurus_;
nor was this the last instance in which philosophers encouraged the
errors and infirmities of human society.

Here, again, therefore, as in the English Sweating Sickness, we meet
with _the relaxed state of skin, and the foul repletion_ engendered by
the same indulgence in sensuality which we have found to exist in the
sixteenth century. How this corruption of morals increased, and to what
a frightful height it was carried among the Romans, it is not necessary
here further to elucidate; and we may take it for a fact, that in
consequence of it, the general constitution of the ancients underwent a
peculiar modification; that this relaxation of skin and gross repletion
were propagated from generation to generation; and that, as among
chronic diseases, those of _a gouty character_ were its more frequent
results, so among the inflammatory, _the cardiac disease_ made its
appearance as the general effect of this kind of life.

Where, however, such a system of life existed among whole communities,
the original and peculiar occasion was not needed in every individual
case to bring the predisposition for a disease which propagated itself
by hereditary taint, to an actual eruption. Shocks to the constitution
of quite a different kind were often sufficient for the purpose. Thus,
among the Romans, it was by no means always the case, that gluttony
and relaxation of the skin immediately gave rise to the cardiac
disease; while, on the other hand, the usual faintness, induced by too
copious blood-letting, passed into this impetuous agitation of the
heart, accompanied by colliquative sweats[834]; and all overviolent
perspirations in other diseases were apt to take the same dangerous
course[835]. We must here also take into account a practice among the
Romans, which was very injurious, and yet rendered sacred by the laws;
namely, visiting the public baths late in the evening, just after the
principal meal, and awaiting the digestion of their food in these
places of soft indulgence[836]. How much must the tendency of sweating
disorders have been favoured by these means!

Surmises founded on the facts already stated, can alone be offered
respecting the nature of the ancient cardiac disease. The ancients
give us no certain intelligence upon it; for their mode of observing
did not lead to that object at which modern medicine aims. _That the
cardiac disease was not of a rheumatic character_ seems deducible from
several circumstances—from the quality of the atmosphere in southern
climates, which is not so favourable to rheumatic maladies, as to give
rise to a distinctly defined form of that complaint throughout a period
of five hundred years; from the nature of the so-called inflammatory
fever, which exhibited no rheumatic symptoms in its course; and
lastly, from the treatment of the cardiac disease, for it was a common
practice to cool down the “diaphoretic” patients in the midst of their
perspiration, by sponging them with cold water, to expose them to
the air, and some physicians went so far as to advise cold baths and
affusions[837]. How could they have ventured upon such remedies if the
cardiac disease had been of a rheumatic nature?

In the sweating fevers of the sixteenth century, every abrupt
refrigeration, every exposure of the skin, was fatal. It is thence to
be inferred, _that the English Sweating Sickness differed from the
ancient cardiac disease in its rheumatic character_; even although
both diseases were founded in common on an impure gross repletion and
relaxation of skin, and the essential phenomena of both went through
the same course: not to advert to other differences which are manifest
from what has been stated.

The remaining treatment of the cardiac disorder should not be
altogether passed over in this place, because it shews very clearly the
general style of thinking of the medical profession, as also certain
metaphysical excitations which are innate in that profession, and of
which there is therefore a repetition in all ages. For whilst some
proceeded with commendable care and caution, and _Aræteus_ feared[838]
a fatal result from the slightest error, others again, would fain
render excited nature obedient to their rough command by means of
the most violent remedies. It, therefore, occasionally happened that
in their over hasty activity they were unable to distinguish between
a salutary perspiration and a dangerous “diaphoresis.” This they
suppressed at all hazards, and thus sent their patients to the shades
of their fathers. Others forthwith flew to Chrysippic bandaging, the
great means of suppressing profuse evacuations, and even violent
spasms[839]. Others were for obviating the debility as quickly as
possible by means of nourishing diet; and overloaded the stomach, as
if the recovery of strength depended entirely upon eating. Others
allowed as much wine as possible to be drunk for twenty-four hours
together, even to the extent of producing intoxication[840]; and
_Asclepiades_ selected for this extraordinary death-bed carousal the
Greek salt wine[841], for the sake of bringing on a diarrhœa, whereby
the opened pores of the skin might again close, and the too mobile
atoms might be carried towards the bowels. With the same object he
ordered active clysters[842], for if they succeeded in causing a full
evacuation, he maintained that the perspiration must necessarily be
arrested! _Endemus_, of the Methodic sect, recommended even clysters
of cold water[843], and whatever else the rashness of medical men had
fool-hardily contrived; acting on the ancient notion, that severe
diseases always required violent remedies. _Aretæus_ recommended
blood-letting, which others pronounced to be nothing short of certain
death[844]. He had, however, a notion that the Causus was the
foundation of the cardiac disease, and perhaps he was right.

A cautious employment of wine was apparently of great use[845], and
what may excite surprise, physicians gave detailed and frivolous
precepts on the choice and enjoyment of food. If the irritable stomach
rejected this repeatedly, they even went so far, according to the
Roman method, as to make the patient vomit both before and after his
meals, in order that the organ might thus bear the repeated use of
nourishment. It was also asserted that the stomach retained food and
wine better if the body were previously rubbed all over with bruised
onions[846]. All this affords us an insight into the nature of this
remarkable disease, which has now so completely vanished from the
world. Finally, when astringent decoctions proved fruitless, particular
confidence was placed in the application of various powders[847] to the
surface of the body, conjointly with the use of light bed-clothes and
the avoidance of feather-beds, which the effeminacy of the ancients
had already introduced[848]. As astringents they selected pomegranate
bark, the leaves of roses, blackberries, and myrtles, as also fullers’
earth, gypsum, alum, litharge, slaked lime[849], and, when nothing else
was at hand, even common road dust[850]! The efficacy of some of these
extraordinary remedies cannot be denied. At least it has been proved in
modern times with respect to alkalies, which are of a somewhat similar
nature, that they are of great service where there is an abundant
determination of acid towards the skin, and it is very probable that
the perspiration of these diaphoretic patients contained much acid.



                 (SUETTE DES PICARDS—SUETTE MILIAIRE.)

The Picardy Sweat is a decided miliary fever, which has often
prevailed, not only in Picardy, but also in other provinces of France,
for more than a hundred years, and even at the present time exists
in some places as an endemic disease[851]. We have pointed out the
affinity between the English Sweating Sickness and miliary fever. Both
are rheumatic fevers—the former of twenty-four hours’ duration, the
latter running a course of at least seven days. In the former there was
no eruption, or if in isolated cases an eruption made its appearance,
it was doubtless subordinate, not essential. In the miliary fever, on
the contrary, the eruption is so essential, that this disease may be
considered as a completely exanthematous form of rheumatic fever.

The history of miliary fever is full of important facts, and the
sweating fever of Picardy forms but a variety of it. The eruption
in itself is of very ancient occurrence, and was most probably, as
at present, observed time immemorial in conjunction with petechiæ,
occurring as a critical metastasis in the oriental glandular plague,
perhaps even in the ancient plague recorded by Thucydides. It also
occasionally accompanied petechial fever, as unquestionably it did
small-pox and many other diseases, in the same manner as we now
see; for the miliary eruption is a very common symptom, which is
easily induced, and increases the danger of various other accidental
complications. This is different, however, from the _idiopathic miliary
fever_, which did not exist either before, or even at the period of
the English Sweating Sickness, but occurred as an epidemic, frequently
mentioned in Saxony, a hundred years later[852], (1652.)

We cannot, therefore, consider this eruptive disease as having
proceeded from the English Sweating Sickness, in the same manner as
the petechial fever had its probable origin in the glandular plague,
even supposing a more decided inclination of the Sweating Sickness
to the eruptive character could be proved than is possible from the
facts afforded. A whole century intervened, and what vast national
revolutions!

This same separation of so long a period makes also against the
supposition, that the English Sweating Sickness was an interrupted
miliary fever, which exhausted its power by a too luxuriant activity
of the skin on the first day, before the eruption made its appearance.
Moreover, the similarity and isolation of all the five epidemic
sweating fevers, as regards the brevity of the course of the disease,
and the absence of all transition forms of any duration, which
certainly would have existed had nature intended gradually to form a
miliary fever out of the English Sweating Sickness, lead to the same
conclusion.

But to return to the miliary fever. Some forms of this disease have
been observed, in which a profuse perspiration, in combination with
nervous symptoms, has endangered life on the first day of the attack;
equally often, too, the eruption has appeared fully formed on the
very first day; and if we duly consider, as we ought, the regular
course of miliary fever whenever it has assumed an epidemic character,
we shall always find, even in that case, a development of symptoms
differing fundamentally from those of the English Sweating Sickness.
If, occasionally, instances of miliary fever occurred, in which no
eruption came out, as was the case recently (in 1821), they were to
be considered in the same light as other acute eruptive diseases,
as, for example, scarlet fever, in which nature indulges in a like
irregularity, without, however, altering the essence of those diseases.
And since, finally, it has been observed in many cases[853], that
the miliary eruption could be prevented by the application of cold
at the commencement, a distinguished modern physician has attached
great consequence to this circumstance, as showing that miliary fever
and the English Sweating Sickness were the same disease[854]; but a
check of this kind is, at all events, impossible in those miliary
fevers where the eruption breaks forth on the first or second day; and
moreover, experience tells us, that many other diseases also, such as
inflammations, rheumatisms, gastric fevers, and even abdominal typhus,
may be arrested in their course, and confined within narrower bounds,
so as not to manifest all their symptoms.

We are, therefore, completely entitled to consider the appearance of
the miliary sweating fevers as altogether a novelty, originating in
the middle of the 17th century, and having no discoverable connexion
with the English Sweating Sickness. There have been in Germany, since
the year 1652, many visitations of miliary fever; but this disease did
not increase much in extent until about the year 1715, when it spread
into France and the neighbouring countries, particularly Piedmont[855],
whilst England remained almost entirely free from it. The French
epidemics were, upon the whole, much more severe than the German; and
on this account we select one of the most ancient, and also the most
recent of them, in order to give a general view of miliary fever, as
compared with the English Sweating Sickness.

The miliary fever first appeared in Picardy, in the year 1718, in le
Vimeux (Vinnemacus pagus), a district on the north of the Somme and
on the south of the Bresle and the department of the Lower Seine. It
increased annually in extent; most places in Picardy were visited by
it, and it was not long before it was seen in Flanders[856].

We are still in possession of a very distinct account, which we will
here detail, of an epidemic at Abbeville in the year 1733, where the
miliary fever had existed fifteen years previously. There were scarcely
any premonitory symptoms, but the disease commenced at once with
pinching pains in the stomach, extreme prostration of strength, dull
headache, and difficulty of breathing, interrupted by sighing. Patients
complained of violent heat, and were bathed in a pungent sweat of foul
odour, while nausea was occasionally felt. Sparks appeared before the
eyes, and _the countenance became flushed_. Patients were tormented
with burning thirst; and yet the tongue was as moist as in perfect
health. The pulse was frequent and undulating, without hardness; and
in the course of _a few hours_, an insufferable itching came on over
the whole body, accompanied by distressing jactitation: upon this,
thickly studded, _red, round pustules_, not bigger than mustard-seeds,
broke out, wherefrom patients emitted an extremely disagreeable urinous
odour, which was imparted to those who were about their persons.
Sometimes they had evacuations, at other times they suffered from
constipation, but all complained of want of sleep; and when they felt
an inclination to doze, they were again aroused by fresh chilliness.
Many bled at the nose till they fainted; and with women, the menstrual
discharge often appeared, though not at the proper time. The urine was
at times deficient in quantity, at others discharged in abundance,
and without any critical signs; if pale and plentiful, it betokened
delirium; then the eyelids twitched convulsively, a humming noise
commenced in the ears, and the patient tossed about restlessly. The
pulse became strong, irregular, and, like the breathing, very quick.
The countenance grew redder and redder; and soon after, the sufferers,
as though struck by lightning, were seized with lethargy, and expired,
generally in the act of coughing and spitting blood.

Such was the nature of the disease when it attacked many at once: there
were, however, several varieties. With some the miliary vesicles broke
out on the _second_ day, with others not before the _third_; and if
all went on favourably, they lost their redness on the _seventh day_,
and _the skin all over the body scaled off like bran_. The fever was
sometimes extremely violent; at others, without apparent cause, very
mild; at least one might be deceived at the commencement of the attack,
by the apparently favourable symptoms; for those who in the morning
had scarcely any notable degree of fever, who neither suffered from
any anxious sensation nor violent heat, in whom no subsultus tendinum
was perceptible, no want of perspiration, nor any retrocession of the
eruption, were sometimes towards evening seized with phrenzy, and died
in a state of lethargy. Evacuations, which alleviate other diseases,
made this miliary fever worse. Favourable symptoms could never be
depended on. In the midst of profuse perspiration the patient died,
either from constipation or diarrhœa. A copious discharge of urine
was a bad sign; composure was succeeded by delirium, cheerfulness by
lethargy: the disease was throughout treacherous and disguised. It
was particularly necessary for those suffering from pleurisy or any
inflammatory fevers to be guarded against its approach. Many fell
sacrifices to this epidemic who thought themselves in a state of
convalescence; and with such it was easier to foretell than to prevent
the consequences. In cases of this kind the miliary vesicles were less
red and grew pale sooner; but if the disease attacked a healthy person,
then they were redder, and continued longer. Of those who recovered,
not a few suffered for many months, nay, even for a whole year, from
night perspirations, without fever or sleeplessness, but with an
eruption of little miliary vesicles, which disappeared[857] again on
the slightest exposure to cold. The later miliary epidemic fevers in
France, which are distinguished by the name of the Picardy Sweating
Sickness, are generally very well described[858]; so much so, that we
have few epidemics of modern times whose course and succession we can
trace so well. But the epidemic of 1821, which raged in the departments
of the Oise, and of the Seine and Oise, from March to October, has been
observed by all with the greatest care, including men of distinguished
talent[859].

We shall give the description of this disease. There were no constant
premonitory symptoms; it often broke out quite suddenly, but many
complained some days before of debility, despondency, want of appetite,
nausea, headache; sometimes also of giddiness and slight chilliness.
Many retired to rest in health, and awoke during the night with the
disease, covered with a perspiration, which ceased only with death or
recovery. With some the sweating was preceded for some hours, or even
only for some moments, by a scarcely perceptible feverish commotion,
accompanied with burning heat, or with a _sensation of pain_ which ran
through every limb, and nearly always with spasms in the stomach. With
others the disease announced itself by lacerating rheumatic pains,
which gradually increasing, they became bed-ridden. The mouth was
foul, the taste at times bitter, the tongue white, more rarely tinged
with yellow, and thus it remained till the patient was restored. The
sufferer was shortly covered with _a thick, peculiarly fetid sweat_,
that certainly produced alleviation, but became very intolerable to
him from its unpleasant stench, which was even communicated to the
clothes of the bystanders. In the mean time it was discovered by the
pulse, that the fever had considerably abated; but, on the third day,
the patient was seized with convulsive _spasms in the stomach_, great
_oppression at the chest_, and a sensation of suffocation—symptoms
which caused him insupportable anguish. These attacks accompanied by
hiccup and eructation, continued for several hours, and returned from
time to time, an eruption, partly papular, simultaneously breaking out
first on the neck, then on the shoulders down to the hands and breast,
less frequently on the thighs and face. The little pimples were of a
pale red colour and conical, with glistening heads, and between them
appeared innumerable small miliary pustules, filled with transparent
serous fluid, which soon thickened and assumed a whiter hue. At the
time and previous to the breaking out of the exanthem, the patient
experienced a very severe _burning and pricking sensation in the skin_,
which nevertheless sometimes occurred on the second or fourth day, and
which increased sometimes in one part, sometimes in another, when the
sweating declined.

Towards the fifth day, however, after the sweating had entirely ceased,
the complaint grew worse again. The spasms and paroxysms of suffocation
returned, and they were succeeded by renewed eruptions of the exanthem;
a decided improvement, however, shortly took place; the little pimples
lost their redness, the miliary vesicles dried away, and at a period
from the seventh to the tenth day recovery commenced under _a general
exfoliation of the cuticle_. Sometimes the eruption did not appear,
whether the patients were under medical treatment, or left to their own
guidance, but with those few in whom there was an absence of miliary
vesicles, that peculiar pricking and itching of the skin did not take
place.

Between the fifth and seventh day the patients usually complained of
great weakness, and had a desire to eat. A few tablespoonfuls of wine
then agreed with them very well; for the rest, neither thirst nor
lethargy was observable, but it was particularly remarkable that the
urine was clear and abundant. Up to the seventh day a confined state
of bowels was usual, and, with the exception of the already mentioned
attacks of tightness and oppression, the breathing remained free,
though with great sleeplessness, during the whole malady. Nothing
morbid was to be observed in the chest, and the patients lay stretched
out at full length, so that there was no occasion at any time to raise
their heads.

Such was the regular course of this miliary fever, but its progress
was often accelerated by very dangerous symptoms, and occasionally it
proved fatal within a very few hours. If at the time of the attack the
patients were very restless and talkative, the eyes glistening, the
pulse, without being hard, tumultuous, and the edges of the tongue
reddened, delirium soon succeeded and then convulsions and death.
Great depression of the spirits was a very bad symptom; bleeding was
never of any avail, yet the menstrual discharge did not interrupt
the course of the disease. There was in general a great degree of
malignancy perceptible in the malady, as was also rendered apparent
by the course of the epidemic. If the miliary Sweating Fever broke out
in a fresh place, two or three persons only were thereupon attacked,
and that favourably, which led to a supposition that the evil had all
passed away, for during the next fifteen or twenty days, not any fresh
attacks were heard of. Suddenly, however, the epidemic reappeared
with increased virulence. The great number of the sufferers spread
consternation and terror amongst the inhabitants, and the cases of
death became frequent. After this first burst of fury, the epidemic
grew more mild again, so that many patients were not confined to
their beds at all. This mitigation of the miliary fever was likewise
manifested[860] by the prolongation of its course beyond the seventh
day.

If we compare this epidemic with the one observed at Abbeville in 1773,
we shall find between them but very trifling differences, which would
appear still more clearly in some of the intermediate visitations,
thus conforming to what has been observed in other eruptive maladies.
It is consequently evident that the miliary fevers[861] which have
appeared in France in recent times, do not differ in any essential
point from those of more ancient date. The surest proof of their
identity is, their persistence for nearly two centuries; and from the
manner in which they have presented themselves to observation, they
are to be considered as distinct from the English Sweating Sickness,
though certainly allied to it. It would exceed our limits to pursue
this inquiry further, but it may be as well to give the following short
catalogue[862] of the most important miliary epidemics.


We now come to a phenomenon which, notwithstanding its short duration
and very limited extension, is one of the most memorable of this
century. Up to the present time, its real importance has not been
recognised, because the clouds of self-sufficient ignorance have
prevented our taking a survey of the formation of diseases, throughout
long periods of tixme. It has been sunk for an age in the sea of
oblivion, from whence we will now draw it forth to the light of day.

In November, 1802, a very hot and dry summer had been succeeded by
incessant rain. Thick fogs spread over the country, and enveloped such
places in central Germany as were inaccessible to ventilation. Amongst
others, the small Franconian town of Roettingen, situated on the river
Tauber, and surrounded by mountains[863]. Scarcely had a few weeks
elapsed, when unexpectedly, towards the 25th of November, an extremely
fatal disease broke out in the town, which was without example in the
memory of its inhabitants, and totally unknown to the physicians of the
country.

Strong vigorous young men were suddenly seized with _unspeakable
dread_; the heart became _agitated_ and _beat violently against_ the
ribs, a _profuse, sour, ill-smelling perspiration_ broke out over
the whole body, and at the same time, they experienced a _lacerating
pain_ in the nape of the neck, as if a violent rheumatic fever had
taken possession of the tendinous tissues. This pain ceased sometimes
very quickly, and if it then shifted to the chest, the distressing
palpitation of the heart recommenced; a spasmodic trembling of the
whole body ensued; the sufferers fainted, their limbs became rigid,
and thus they breathed their last. _In most cases, all this occurred
within four and twenty hours._ They did not all, however, succumb under
the first attack, but as soon as the accelerated pulse had sunk to the
lowest ebb of smallness and feebleness, a corresponding effect being
observable in the respiration, the violent pain would in some cases
return to the outward parts. The patient then felt a benumbing pressure
and stiffness in the nape of the neck; and the pulse and respiration
became restored again as in health, but the perspiration continued to
pour incessantly down the skin.

This apparent safety was, however, very deceptive, for a renewed
palpitation of the heart unexpectedly commenced, accompanied by a
feeble pulse; and then death was often inevitable. It was remarkable,
that the patients, though bathed in perspiration, had very little
thirst, and the tongue was not dry, nor ever even foul, but retained
its natural moisture. With most, however, the urine was scanty; as
the skin, under the increasing debility, permitted too much fluid to
stream forth through its pores. _If the disease passed off without
heating sudorifics, then in general no eruption made its appearance._
The malady then continued till the sixth day, but on the first only,
did it display its malignant symptoms, for by the second, the sweating
diminished and lost every unfavourable quality, so that increased
transpiration of the skin, without any other symptoms of importance,
alone remained, and on the sixth day the patient was perfectly
restored.

Had there been in Roettingen a physician at hand from the commencement,
_well skilled in medical history_, and who would have adopted the old
English treatment of the Sweating Sickness, this new fever would have
appeared but as a perfectly mild disease, and would certainly have
carried off but few of the inhabitants of this peaceful little town.
As it was, however, the scenes of Lübeck and Zwickau were renewed,
and it seemed as if the innumerable victims to the hot treatment, and
to _Kegeler’s_ truculent medical work, had descended to the grave in
vain. _The sufferers were, as in the sixteenth century, literally
stewed to death!_ for the moment the people imagined that they knew
how nature meant to escape, they ordered feather-beds to be heaped
on the perspiring patient, so that the mouth and nose alone remained
uncovered. Doors and windows were tightly closed, and the stove emitted
a glowing heat, whilst a most intolerable odour of perspiration
streamed forth from beneath the broad and lofty beds; added to which,
that two and even more patients were often lying in the same room;
nay, even stowed together under the same mountain of feathers, and in
order that inward heat might not be wanting, pots of theriaca were
swallowed, and the patient was incessantly plied with elder electuary.
Thus the bad humours were expelled together with the perspiration;
and whether the sufferers were suffocated, or surmounted, as by a
miracle, this mal-treatment of nature, a conviction was felt, that the
most salutary remedies had been employed, and when at last, eruptions
of various colours broke out, it was considered as certain, that the
poison had been carried off in them. The citizens of Roettingen,
therefore, fell into the same erroneous opinion, which, upheld by
medical schools, had, time immemorial, increased inflammatory diseases,
particularly the exanthematous, and caused them to become malignant.
The above-mentioned eruptions were of various sorts; miliary vesicles
of every form and colour, filled with an acrid fluid; actual blistery
eruptions, (pemphigus,) and even petechiæ; and it is to be observed,
that the patients, during the first days of the sweating fever, never
suffered from that peculiar pricking sensation over the whole body,
which precedes the eruption of miliaria, but complained only, and that
not always, of a local itching, where the eruption had broken out. It
was equally rare to observe a regular desquamation of the skin, and it
is therefore to be assumed, that _the eruptions were only symptomatic_,
and not by any means necessarily connected with the disease, as in the
decidedly miliary fevers.

The disease excited, from its very commencement, the greatest
consternation; and as it was increased, even from the first days of
its appearance, by the sudorific system of treatment, deaths were
multiplied; the continual peal of funeral bells struck mortal terror,
as of old at Shrewsbury, into the hearts of both sick and healthy; and
this oppressed little town was shunned as a pesthole by the inhabitants
of the surrounding neighbourhood. At the commencement of the disease,
they were entirely without medical advice, till a skilful physician
arrived from the vicinity[864], and as _most of the inhabitants_ were
already attacked with the sweating fever, he immediately prescribed
the proper treatment. But the powers of one man are not sufficient,
amid such confusion, to contend with the deeply rooted prejudices of
the people, and so they continued in most houses to expel by heat and
theriaca both perspiration and life together; till at last, on the
third of December, _Dr. Sinner_ of Würzburg arrived, without whom the
remembrance of this remarkable disease would have been obliterated, and
conjointly with his gallant colleague, like the anonymous physician
formerly in Zwickau, subdued the destructive prejudices of the people.
He found eighty-four patients[865] under piles of feather-beds, who,
when pure air was admitted, breathed once more freely, and by a prudent
cooling system, all recovered easily, and without danger, one only
excepted. His method reminds us of the old English treatment[866].
The disease was confined entirely to Roettingen, it did not make its
appearance anywhere beyond the gates of this little town. On the fifth
of December, however, clear, frosty weather set in; from that time no
new cases occurred, and all traces of this Roettingen sweating fever,
which was never either preceded or followed by miliary fever in any
part of Franconia, have from that time disappeared.

The resemblance of this fever to the English Sweating Sickness is
manifest, and is proved even by the short (_only ten days’_) duration
of the visitation, which, as we have stated, is a most essential
characteristic of the English sweating epidemic, at least as it
appeared in Germany, the miliary epidemics always having lasted a much
longer period. But if we confine ourselves merely to the symptoms of
the disease, we shall find, that in the Roettingen sweating fever,
there are, throughout, none that can be considered essential, except
the _palpitation of the heart, accompanied with anguish_, the _profuse
perspiration_, and the _rheumatic pains in the nape of the neck_,
which never were wanting in any case; and the very same symptoms are
clearly and perceptibly to be discerned in like proportion as compared
with others, in the representation of the English Sweating Sickness;
whereas, the eruptions were altogether as unessential as in the
epidemic of the sixteenth century. The irritability of the skin, and
tendency to dangerous metastases, were less marked in the Roettingen
fever than in the English Sweating Sickness; for the patients could,
without injury, change their linen in the midst of the perspiration,
which, in the English Sweating Sickness, could not have been done
without fatal consequences; but this difference can easily be accounted
for, from the greater degree of suffering in the latter disease than in
the former. It only now remains to examine the duration of the disease,
and here we plainly perceive that the principal paroxysm was over in
the Roettingen epidemic within the first four and twenty hours, at
least when it was undisturbed by treatment; and the sole symptom which
continued until the sixth day—the increased perspiration, (we speak
here only of perfectly pure cases,) could only reasonably be regarded
as a sequela. The crisis did not occur all on a sudden, as in the
English Sweating Sickness, but this cannot constitute any essential
difference.

We do not hesitate, therefore, to pronounce _the Roettingen fever to
have been the same disease as the English Sweating Sickness_. To give,
however, this phenomenon its proper interpretation—to have a clear
conception of the causes which again drew down from the clouds, into
the midst of Germany, this mist-born spectre of 1529, and allowed it
to expend its brief fury upon a single place, is beyond the power
of human wisdom. Science is not comprehensive enough to discover, in
the crossings of these unknown comet-paths, the moving causes of this
visitation of disease. But as all insight into the works of nature must
be preceded by a strict investigation and search after phenomena in all
countries, at all times, and under all circumstances of development, so
an improved knowledge of diseases and of the whole human system, will
not fail to follow, when the investigations of epidemics throughout
extensive periods have increased in number and success.

_The present age demands such a knowledge of medical men, whose
vocation it is to investigate life minutely in all its bearings. It
demands of them an historical pathology, and to this branch of the
study of nature is the present work intended to contribute._