
           THE DANCING MANIA IN GERMANY AND THE NETHERLANDS.



The effects of the _Black Death_ had not yet subsided, and the graves
of millions of its victims were scarcely closed, when a strange
delusion arose in Germany, which took possession of the minds of men,
and, in spite of the divinity of our nature, hurried away body and soul
into the magic circle of hellish superstition. It was a convulsion
which in the most extraordinary manner infuriated the human frame,
and excited the astonishment of contemporaries for more than two
centuries, since which time it has never reappeared. It was called
the dance of St. John or of St. Vitus, on account of the Bacchantic
leaps by which it was characterized, and which gave to those affected,
whilst performing their wild dance, and screaming and foaming with
fury, all the appearance of persons possessed. It did not remain
confined to particular localities, but was propagated by the sight of
the sufferers, like a demoniacal epidemic, over the whole of Germany
and the neighbouring countries to the north-west, which were already
prepared for its reception by the prevailing opinions of the times.

So early as the year 1374, assemblages of men and women were seen at
Aix-la-Chapelle who had come out of Germany, and who, united by one
common delusion, exhibited to the public both in the streets and in
the churches the following strange spectacle[204]. They formed circles
hand in hand, and appearing to have lost all control over their senses,
continued dancing, regardless of the bystanders, for hours together,
in wild delirium, until at length they fell to the ground in a state
of exhaustion. They then complained of extreme oppression, and groaned
as if in the agonies of death, until they were swathed in cloths bound
tightly round their waists, upon which they again recovered, and
remained free from complaint until the next attack. This practice of
swathing was resorted to on account of the tympany which followed these
spasmodic ravings, but the bystanders frequently relieved patients in
a less artificial manner, by thumping and trampling upon the parts
affected. While dancing they neither saw nor heard, being insensible to
external impressions through the senses, but were haunted by visions,
their fancies conjuring up spirits whose names[205] they shrieked
out; and some of them afterwards asserted that they felt as if they
had been immersed in a stream of blood, which obliged them to leap so
high[206]. Others, during the paroxysm, saw the heavens open and the
Saviour enthroned with the Virgin Mary, according as the religious
notions of the age were strangely and variously reflected in their
imaginations[207].

Where the disease was completely developed, the attack commenced
with epileptic convulsions[208]. Those affected fell to the ground
senseless, panting and labouring for breath. They foamed at the mouth,
and suddenly springing up began their dance amidst strange contortions.
Yet the malady doubtless made its appearance very variously, and was
modified by temporary or local circumstances, whereof non-medical
contemporaries but imperfectly noted the essential particulars,
accustomed as they were to confound their observation of natural events
with their notions of the world of spirits.

It was but a few months ere this demoniacal disease had spread from
Aix-la-Chapelle, where it appeared in July, over the neighbouring
Netherlands[209]. In Liege, Utrecht, Tongres, and many other towns of
Belgium, the dancers appeared with garlands in their hair, and their
waists girt with cloths, that they might, as soon as the paroxysm
was over, receive immediate relief on the attack of the tympany.
This bandage was, by the insertion of a stick, easily twisted tight:
many, however, obtained more relief from kicks and blows, which they
found numbers of persons ready to administer; for, wherever the
dancers appeared, the people assembled in crowds to gratify their
curiosity with the frightful spectacle. At length the increasing
number of the affected excited no less anxiety than the attention
that was paid to them. In towns and villages they took possession of
the religious houses, processions were everywhere instituted on their
account, and masses were said and hymns were sung, while the disease
itself, of the demoniacal origin of which no one entertained the
least doubt, excited everywhere astonishment and horror. In Liege the
priests had recourse to exorcisms, and endeavoured, by every means
in their power, to allay an evil which threatened so much danger to
themselves; for the possessed assembling in multitudes, frequently
poured forth imprecations against them, and menaced their destruction.
They intimidated the people also to such a degree that there was an
express ordinance issued that no one should make any but square-toed
shoes, because these fanatics had manifested a morbid dislike to
the pointed shoes which had come into fashion immediately after the
_Great Mortality_ in 1350[210]. They were still more irritated at
the sight of red colours, the influence of which on the disordered
nerves might lead us to imagine an extraordinary accordance between
this spasmodic malady and the condition of infuriated animals; but in
the St. John’s dancers this excitement was probably connected with
apparitions consequent upon their convulsions. There were likewise some
of them who were unable to endure the sight of persons weeping[211].
The clergy seemed to become daily more and more confirmed in their
belief that those who were affected were a kind of sectarians, and
on this account they hastened their exorcisms as much as possible,
in order that the evil might not spread amongst the higher classes,
for hitherto scarcely any but the poor had been attacked, and the few
people of respectability among the laity and clergy who were to be
found among them, were persons whose natural frivolity was unable to
withstand the excitement of novelty, even though it proceeded from
a demoniacal influence. Some of the affected had indeed themselves
declared, when under the influence of priestly forms of exorcism,
that if the demons had been allowed only a few weeks more time, they
would have entered the bodies of the nobility and princes, and through
these have destroyed the clergy. Assertions of this sort, which those
possessed uttered whilst in a state which may be compared with that of
magnetic sleep, obtained general belief, and passed from mouth to mouth
with wonderful additions. The priesthood were, on this account, so much
the more zealous in their endeavours to anticipate every dangerous
excitement of the people, as if the existing order of things could have
been seriously threatened by such incoherent ravings. Their exertions
were effectual, for exorcism was a powerful remedy in the fourteenth
century; or it might perhaps be that this wild infatuation terminated
in consequence of the exhaustion which naturally ensued from it; at all
events, in the course of ten or eleven months the St. John’s dancers
were no longer to be found in any of the cities of Belgium. The evil,
however, was too deeply rooted to give way altogether to such feeble
attacks[212].

A few months after this dancing malady had made its appearance at
Aix-la-Chapelle, it broke out at Cologne, where the number of those
possessed amounted to more than five hundred[213], and about the
same time at Metz, the streets of which place are said to have been
filled with eleven hundred dancers[214]. Peasants left their ploughs,
mechanics their workshops, housewives their domestic duties, to join
the wild revels, and this rich commercial city became the scene of
the most ruinous disorder. Secret desires were excited, and but too
often found opportunities for wild enjoyment; and numerous beggars,
stimulated by vice and misery, availed themselves of this new complaint
to gain a temporary livelihood. Girls and boys quitted their parents,
and servants their masters, to amuse themselves at the dances of those
possessed, and greedily imbibed the poison of mental infection. Above
a hundred unmarried women were seen raving about in consecrated and
unconsecrated places, and the consequences were soon perceived[215].
Gangs of idle vagabonds, who understood how to imitate to the life the
gestures and convulsions of those really affected, roved from place
to place seeking maintenance and adventures, and thus, wherever they
went, spreading this disgusting spasmodic disease like a plague; for
in maladies of this kind the susceptible are infected as easily by the
appearance as by the reality. At last it was found necessary to drive
away these mischievous guests, who were equally inaccessible to the
exorcisms of the priests and the remedies of the physicians. It was
not, however, until after four months that the Rhenish cities were able
to suppress these impostures, which had so alarmingly increased the
original evil. In the mean time, when once called into existence, the
plague crept on, and found abundant food in the tone of thought which
prevailed in the fourteenth and fifteenth centuries, and even, though
in a minor degree, throughout the sixteenth and seventeenth, causing
a permanent disorder of the mind, and exhibiting, in those cities to
whose inhabitants it was a novelty, scenes as strange as they were
detestable.



Strasburg was visited by the “Dancing Plague” in the year 1418, and
the same infatuation existed among the people there, as in the towns
of Belgium and the Lower Rhine[217]. Many who were seized at the sight
of those affected, excited attention at first by their confused and
absurd behaviour, and then by their constantly following the swarms of
dancers. These were seen day and night passing through the streets,
accompanied by musicians playing on bagpipes, and by innumerable
spectators attracted by curiosity, to which were added anxious parents
and relations, who came to look after those among the misguided
multitude who belonged to their respective families. Imposture and
profligacy played their part in this city also, but the morbid delusion
itself seems to have predominated. On this account religion could only
bring provisional aid, and therefore the town-council benevolently took
an interest in the afflicted. They divided them into separate parties,
to each of which they appointed responsible superintendents to protect
them from harm, and perhaps also to restrain their turbulence. They
were thus conducted on foot and in carriages to the chapels of St.
Vitus, near Zabern and Rotestein, where priests were in attendance
to work upon their misguided minds by masses and other religious
ceremonies. After divine worship was completed, they were led in
solemn procession to the altar, where they made some small offering of
alms, and where it is probable that many were, through the influence
of devotion and the sanctity of the place, cured of this lamentable
aberration. It is worthy of observation, at all events, that the
Dancing Mania did not recommence at the altars of the saint, and that
from him alone assistance was implored, and through his miraculous
interposition a cure was expected, which was beyond the reach of human
skill. The personal history of St. Vitus is by no means unimportant
in this matter. He was a Sicilian youth, who, together with Modestus
and Crescentia, suffered martyrdom at the time of the persecution of
the Christians, under Diocletian, in the year 303[218]. The legends
respecting him are obscure, and he would certainly have been passed
over without notice among the innumerable apocryphal martyrs of the
first centuries, had not the transfer of his body to St. Denys, and
thence, in the year 836, to Corvey, raised him to a higher rank. From
this time forth, it may be supposed that many miracles were manifested
at his new sepulchre, which were of essential service in confirming the
Roman faith among the Germans, and St. Vitus was soon ranked among the
fourteen saintly helpers (Nothhelfer or Apotheker[219]). His altars
were multiplied, and the people had recourse to them in all kinds of
distresses, and revered him as a powerful intercessor. As the worship
of these saints was, however, at that time stripped of all historical
connexions, which were purposely obliterated by the priesthood, a
legend was invented at the beginning of the fifteenth century, or
perhaps even so early as the fourteenth, that St. Vitus had, just
before he bent his neck to the sword, prayed to God that he might
protect from the Dancing Mania all those who should solemnize the day
of his commemoration, and fast upon its eve, and that thereupon a voice
from heaven was heard, saying, “Vitus, thy prayer is accepted.”[220]
Thus St. Vitus became the patron saint of those afflicted with the
dancing plague, as St. Martin, of Tours, was at one time the succourer
of persons in small-pox; St. Antonius of those suffering under the
“hellish fire,” and as St. Margaret was the Juno Lucina of puerperal
women.



The connexion which John the Baptist had with the dancing mania of
the fourteenth century, was of a totally different character. He
was originally far from being a protecting saint to those who were
attacked, or one who would be likely to give them relief from a malady
considered as the work of the devil. On the contrary, the manner in
which he was worshipped afforded an important and very evident cause
for its development. From the remotest period, perhaps even so far
back as the fourth century, St. John’s day was solemnized with all
sorts of strange and rude customs, of which the originally mystical
meaning was variously disfigured among different nations by superadded
relics of heathenism[221]. Thus the Germans transferred to the festival
of St. John’s day an ancient heathen usage, the kindling of the
“Nodfyr,” which was forbidden them by St. Boniface, and the belief
subsists even to the present day that people and animals that have
leaped through these flames, or their smoke, are protected for a whole
year from fevers and other diseases, as if by a kind of baptism by
fire[222]. Bacchanalian dances, which have originated in similar causes
among all the rude nations of the earth, and the wild extravagancies
of a heated imagination, were the constant accompaniments of this
half-heathen, half-christian, festival. At the period of which we are
treating, however, the Germans were not the only people who gave way
to the ebullitions of fanaticism in keeping the festival of St. John
the Baptist. Similar customs were also to be found among the nations
of Southern Europe and of Asia[223], and it is more than probable that
the Greeks transferred to the festival of John the Baptist, who is also
held in high esteem among the Mahomedans, a part of their Bacchanalian
mysteries, an absurdity of a kind which is but too frequently met with
in human affairs. How far a remembrance of the history of St. John’s
death may have had an influence on this occasion, we would leave
learned theologians to decide. It is only of importance here to add,
that in Abyssinia, a country entirely separated from Europe, where
Christianity has maintained itself in its primeval simplicity against
Mahomedanism, John is to this day worshipped, as protecting saint of
those who are attacked with the dancing malady[224]. In these fragments
of the dominion of mysticism and superstition, historical connexion is
not to be found.

When we observe, however, that the first dancers in Aix-la-Chapelle
appeared in July with St. John’s name in their mouths, the conjecture
is probable that the wild revels of St. John’s day, A. D. 1374, gave
rise to this mental plague, which thenceforth has visited so many
thousands with incurable aberration of mind, and disgusting distortions
of body.

This is rendered so much the more probable, because some months
previously the districts in the neighbourhood of the Rhine and the
Maine had met with great disasters. So early as February, both these
rivers had overflowed their banks to a great extent; the walls of the
town of Cologne, on the side next the Rhine, had fallen down, and a
great many villages had been reduced to the utmost distress[225].
To this was added the miserable condition of Western and Southern
Germany. Neither law nor edict could suppress the incessant feuds of
the Barons, and in Franconia especially, the ancient times of club
law appeared to be revived. Security of property there was none;
arbitrary will everywhere prevailed; corruption of morals and rude
power rarely met with even a feeble opposition; whence it arose that
the cruel, but lucrative, persecutions of the Jews, were in many
places still practised through the whole of this century, with their
wonted ferocity. Thus, throughout the western parts of Germany, and
especially in the districts bordering on the Rhine, there was a
wretched and oppressed populace; and if we take into consideration,
that among their numerous bands many wandered about, whose consciences
were tormented with the recollection of the crimes which they had
committed during the prevalence of the black plague, we shall
comprehend how their despair sought relief in the intoxication of an
artificial delirium[226]. There is hence good ground for supposing that
the frantic celebration of the festival of St. John, A. D. 1374, only
served to bring to a crisis, a malady which had been long impending;
and if we would further inquire how a hitherto harmless usage, which,
like many others, had but served to keep up superstition, could
degenerate into so serious a disease, we must take into account the
unusual excitement of men’s minds, and the consequences of wretchedness
and want. The bowels, which in many were debilitated by hunger and bad
food, were precisely the parts which in most cases were attacked with
excruciating pain, and the tympanitic state of the intestines, points
out to the intelligent physician, an origin of the disorder which is
well worth consideration.



The dancing mania of the year 1374 was, in fact, no new disease, but
a phenomenon well known in the middle ages, of which many wondrous
stories were traditionally current among the people. In the year 1237,
upwards of a hundred children were said to have been suddenly seized
with this disease at Erfurt, and to have proceeded dancing and jumping
along the road to Arnstadt. When they arrived at that place they
fell exhausted to the ground, and, according to an account of an old
chronicle, many of them, after they were taken home by their parents,
died, and the rest remained affected, to the end of their lives, with
a permanent tremor[227]. Another occurrence was related to have taken
place on the Mosel bridge at Utrecht, on the 17th day of June, A.D.
1278, when two hundred fanatics began to dance, and would not desist
until a priest passed who was carrying the Host to a person that was
sick, upon which, as if in punishment of their crime, the bridge gave
way, and they were all drowned[228]. A similar event also occurred
so early as the year 1027, near the convent church of Kolbig, not
far from Bernburg. According to an oft repeated tradition, eighteen
peasants, some of whose names are still preserved, are said to have
disturbed divine service on Christmas eve, by dancing and brawling
in the churchyard, whereupon the priest, Ruprecht, inflicted a curse
upon them, that they should dance and scream for a whole year without
ceasing. This curse is stated to have been completely fulfilled, so
that the unfortunate sufferers at length sank knee deep into the
earth, and remained the whole time without nourishment, until they
were finally released by the intercession of two pious bishops. It is
said, that upon this, they fell into a deep sleep, which lasted three
days, and that four of them died: the rest continuing to suffer all
their lives from a trembling of their limbs[229]. It is not worth while
to separate what may have been true, and what the addition of crafty
priests, in this strangely distorted story. It is sufficient that it
was believed, and related with astonishment and horror throughout
the middle ages; so that when there was any exciting cause for this
delirious raving, and wild rage for dancing, it failed not to produce
its effects upon men whose thoughts were given up to a belief in
wonders and apparitions.

This disposition of mind, altogether so peculiar to the middle ages,
and which, happily for mankind, has yielded to an improved state of
civilization and the diffusion of popular instruction, accounts for
the origin and long duration of this extraordinary mental disorder.
The good sense of the people recoiled with horror and aversion from
this heavy plague, which, whenever malevolent persons wished to curse
their bitterest enemies and adversaries, was long after used as a
malediction[230]. The indignation also that was felt by the people
at large against the immorality of the age, was proved by their
ascribing this frightful affliction to the inefficacy of baptism by
unchaste priests, as if innocent children were doomed to atone, in
after years, for this desecration of the sacrament administered by
unholy hands[231]. We have already mentioned what perils the priests
in the Netherlands incurred from this belief. They now, indeed,
endeavoured to hasten their reconciliation with the irritated, and at
that time very degenerate people[232], by exorcisms, which, with some,
procured them greater respect than ever, because they thus visibly
restored thousands of those who were affected. In general, however,
there prevailed a want of confidence in their efficacy, and then the
sacred rites had as little power in arresting the progress of this
deeply rooted malady, as the prayers and holy services subsequently
had at the altars of the greatly revered martyr St. Vitus. We may
therefore ascribe it to accident merely, and to a certain aversion to
this demoniacal disease, which seemed to lie beyond the reach of human
skill, that we meet with but few and imperfect notices, of the St.
Vitus’s dance in the second half of the fifteenth century. The highly
coloured descriptions of the sixteenth century contradict the notion
that this mental plague had in any degree diminished in its severity,
and not a single fact is to be found which supports the opinion, that
any one of the essential symptoms of the disease, not even excepting
the tympany, had disappeared, or that the disorder itself had become
milder in its attacks. The physicians never, as it seems, throughout
the whole of the fifteenth century, undertook the treatment of the
dancing mania, which, according to the prevailing notions, appertained
exclusively to the servants of the church. Against demoniacal disorders
they had no remedies, and though some at first did promulgate the
opinion, that the malady had its origin in natural circumstances, such
as a hot temperament, and other causes named in the phraseology of the
schools[233], yet these opinions were the less examined, as it did not
appear worth while to divide with a jealous priesthood, the care of a
host of fanatical vagabonds and beggars.



It was not until the beginning of the sixteenth century that the St.
Vitus’s dance was made the subject of medical research, and stripped
of its unhallowed character as a work of demons. This was effected by
Paracelsus, that mighty, but as yet scarcely comprehended reformer
of medicine, whose aim it was to withdraw diseases from the pale of
miraculous interpositions and saintly influences, and explain their
causes upon principles deduced from his knowledge of the human frame.
“We will not, however, admit that the saints have power to inflict
diseases, and that these ought to be named after them, although many
there are who, in their theology, lay great stress on this supposition,
ascribing them rather to God than to nature, which is but idle talk. We
dislike such nonsensical gossip as is not supported by symptoms, but
only by faith, a thing which is not human, whereon the gods themselves
set no value.”

Such were the words which Paracelsus addressed to his contemporaries,
who were as yet incapable of appreciating doctrines of this sort; for
the belief in enchantment still remained everywhere unshaken, and faith
in the world of spirits still held men’s minds in so close a bondage
that thousands were, according to their own conviction, given up as a
prey to the devil; while at the command of religion as well as of law,
countless piles were lighted, by the flames of which human society was
to be purified.

Paracelsus divides the St. Vitus’s dance into three kinds. First,
that which arises from imagination (Vitista, Chorea imaginativa,
æstimativa), by which the original dancing plague is to be understood.
Secondly, that which arises from sensual desires, depending on the will
(Chorea lasciva). Thirdly, that which arises from corporeal causes
(Chorea naturalis, coacta), which, according to a strange notion of
his own, he explained by maintaining, that in certain vessels which
are susceptible of an internal pruriency, and thence produce laughter,
the blood is set in commotion, in consequence of an alteration in the
vital spirits, whereby involuntary fits of intoxicating joy, and a
propensity to dance, are occasioned[234]. To this notion he was, no
doubt, led from having observed a milder form of St. Vitus’s dance, not
uncommon in his time, which was accompanied by involuntary laughter;
and which bore a resemblance to the hysterical laughter of the moderns,
except that it was characterized by more pleasurable sensations,
and by an extravagant propensity to dance. There was no howling,
screaming, and jumping, as in the severer form; neither was the
disposition to dance by any means insuperable. Patients thus affected,
although they had not a complete control over their understandings,
yet were sufficiently self-possessed, during the attack, to obey the
directions which they received. There were even some among them who
did not dance at all, but only felt an involuntary impulse to allay
the internal sense of disquietude, which is the usual forerunner of
an attack of this kind, by laughter, and quick walking carried to the
extent of producing fatigue[235]. This disorder, so different from the
original type, evidently approximates to the modern chorea; or rather
is in perfect accordance with it, even to the less essential symptom
of laughter. A mitigation in the form of the dancing mania had thus
clearly taken place at the commencement of the sixteenth century.

On the communication of the St. Vitus’s dance by sympathy, Paracelsus,
in his peculiar language, expresses himself with great spirit, and
shows a profound knowledge of the nature of sensual impressions, which
find their way to the heart,—the seat of joys and emotions,—which
overpower the opposition of reason; and whilst “all other qualities and
natures” are subdued, incessantly impel the patient, in consequence of
his original compliance, and his all conquering imagination, to imitate
what he has seen. On his treatment of the disease, we cannot bestow
any great praise, but must be content with the remark, that it was in
conformity with the notions of the age in which he lived. For the first
kind, which often originated in passionate excitement, he had a mental
remedy, the efficacy of which is not to be despised, if we estimate
its value in connexion with the prevalent opinions of those times.
The patient was to make an image of himself in wax or resin, and by an
effort of thought to concentrate all his blasphemies and sins in it.
“Without the intervention of any other person, to set his whole mind
and thoughts concerning these oaths in the image;” and when he had
succeeded in this, he was to burn the image, so that not a particle of
it should remain[236]. In all this there was no mention made of St.
Vitus, or any of the other mediatory saints, which is accounted for
by the circumstance, that, at this time, an open rebellion against
the Romish Church had begun, and the worship of saints was by many
rejected as idolatrous[237]. For the second kind of St. Vitus’s dance,
arising from sensual irritation, with which women were far more
frequently affected than men, Paracelsus recommended harsh treatment
and strict fasting. He directed that the patients should be deprived of
their liberty; placed in solitary confinement, and made to sit in an
uncomfortable place, until their misery brought them to their senses
and to a feeling of penitence. He then permitted them gradually to
return to their accustomed habits. Severe corporal chastisement was
not omitted; but, on the other hand, angry resistance on the part of
the patient was to be sedulously avoided, on the ground that it might
increase his malady, or even destroy him: moreover, where it seemed
proper, Paracelsus allayed the excitement of the nerves by immersion
in cold water. On the treatment of the third kind we shall not here
enlarge. It was to be effected by all sorts of wonderful remedies,
composed of the quintessences; and it would require, to render it
intelligible, a more extended exposition of peculiar principles than
suits our present purpose.



About this time the St. Vitus’s dance began to decline, so that milder
forms of it appeared more frequently, while the severer cases became
more rare; and even in these, some of the important symptoms gradually
disappeared. Paracelsus makes no mention of the tympanites as taking
place after the attacks, although it may occasionally have occurred;
and Schenck von Graffenberg, a celebrated physician of the latter
half of the sixteenth century[238], speaks of this disease as having
been frequent only in the time of his forefathers; his descriptions,
however, are applicable to the whole of that century, and to the
close of the fifteenth[239]. The St. Vitus’s dance attacked people
of all stations, especially those who led a sedentary life, such as
shoemakers and tailors; but even the most robust peasants abandoned
their labours in the fields, as if they were possessed by evil spirits;
and thus those affected were seen assembling indiscriminately, from
time to time, at certain appointed places, and, unless prevented by
the lookers on, continuing to dance without intermission, until their
very last breath was expended. Their fury and extravagance of demeanour
so completely deprived them of their senses, that many of them dashed
their brains out against the walls and corners of buildings, or
rushed headlong into rapid rivers, where they found a watery grave.
Roaring and foaming as they were, the bystanders could only succeed
in restraining them by placing benches and chairs in their way, so
that, by the high leaps they were thus tempted to take, their strength
might be exhausted. As soon as this was the case, they fell as it were
lifeless to the ground, and, by very slow degrees, again recovered
their strength. Many there were, who, even with all this exertion,
had not expended the violence of the tempest which raged within
them, but awoke with newly revived powers, and again and again mixed
with the crowd of dancers, until at length the violent excitement of
their disordered nerves was allayed by the great involuntary exertion
of their limbs; and the mental disorder was calmed by the extreme
exhaustion of the body. Thus the attacks themselves were in these
cases, as in their nature they are in all nervous complaints, necessary
crises of an inward morbid condition, which was transferred from the
sensorium to the nerves of motion, and, at an earlier period, to the
abdominal plexus, where a deep-seated derangement of the system was
perceptible from the secretion of flatus in the intestines.

The cure effected by these stormy attacks was in many cases so perfect,
that some patients returned to the factory or the plough as if nothing
had happened. Others, on the contrary, paid the penalty of their folly
by so total a loss of power, that they could not regain their former
health, even by the employment of the most strengthening remedies.
Medical men were astonished to observe, that women in an advanced state
of pregnancy were capable of going through an attack of the disease,
without the slightest injury to their offspring, which they protected
merely by a bandage passed round the waist. Cases of this kind were not
unfrequent so late as Schenck’s time. That patients should be violently
affected by music, and their paroxysms brought on and increased by it,
is natural with such nervous disorders; where deeper impressions are
made through the ear, which is the most intellectual of all the organs,
than through any of the other senses. On this account the magistrates
hired musicians for the purpose of carrying the St. Vitus’s dancers so
much the quicker through the attacks, and directed, that athletic men
should be sent among them in order to complete the exhaustion, which
had been often observed to produce a good effect[240]. At the same
time there was a prohibition against wearing red garments, because,
at the sight of this colour, those affected became so furious, that
they flew at the persons who wore it, and were so bent upon doing
them an injury that they could with difficulty be restrained. They
frequently tore their own clothes whilst in the paroxysm, and were
guilty of other improprieties, so that the more opulent employed
confidential attendants to accompany them, and to take care that they
did no harm either to themselves or others. This extraordinary disease
was, however, so greatly mitigated in Schenck’s time, that the St.
Vitus’s dancers had long since ceased to stroll from town to town; and
that physician, like Paracelsus, makes no mention of the tympanitic
inflation of the bowels. Moreover, most of those affected, were only
annually visited by attacks; and the occasion of them was so manifestly
referrible to the prevailing notions of that period, that if the
unqualified belief in the supernatural agency of saints could have
been abolished, they would not have had any return of the complaint.
Throughout the whole of June, prior to the festival of St. John,
patients felt a disquietude and restlessness which they were unable
to overcome. They were dejected, timid, and anxious; wandered about
in an unsettled state, being tormented with twitching pains, which
seized them suddenly in different parts, and eagerly expected the eve
of St. John’s day, in the confident hope, that by dancing at the altars
of this saint, or of St. Vitus, (for in the Breisgau aid was equally
sought from both,) they would be freed from all their sufferings. This
hope was not disappointed; and they remained, for the rest of the year,
exempt from any further attack, after having thus, by dancing and
raving for three hours, satisfied an irresistible demand of nature.
There were at that period two chapels in the Breisgau, visited by the
St. Vitus’s dancers; namely, the Chapel of St. Vitus at Biessen, near
Breisach, and that of St. John, near Wasenweiler; and it is probable
that in the south-west of Germany, the disease was still in existence
in the seventeenth century.

However, it grew every year more rare, so that, at the beginning of the
seventeenth century, it was observed only occasionally in its ancient
form. Thus in the spring of the year 1623, G. Horst saw some women who
annually performed a pilgrimage to St. Vitus’s chapel at Drefelhausen,
near Weissenstein, in the territory of Ulm, that they might wait for
their dancing fit there, in the same manner as those in the Breisgau
did, according to Schenck’s account. They were not satisfied, however,
with a dance of three hours’ duration, but continued day and night in a
state of mental aberration, like persons in an ecstacy, until they fell
exhausted to the ground; and when they came to themselves again, they
felt relieved from a distressing uneasiness and painful sensation of
weight in their bodies, of which they had complained for several weeks
prior to St. Vitus’s day[241].

After this commotion they remained well for the whole year; and such
was their faith in the protecting power of the saint, that one of them
had visited this shrine at Drefelhausen more than twenty times, and
another had already kept the Saint’s day for the thirty-second time at
this sacred station.

The dancing fit itself was excited here, as it probably was in other
places, by music, from the effects of which, the patients were thrown
into a state of convulsion[242]. Many concurrent testimonies serve to
show that music generally contributed much to the continuance of the
St. Vitus’s dance, originated, and increased its paroxysms, and was
sometimes the cause of their mitigation. So early as the fourteenth
century, the swarms of St. John’s dancers were accompanied by minstrels
playing upon noisy instruments, who roused their morbid feelings;
and it may readily be supposed that, by the performance of lively
melodies, and the stimulating effects which the shrill tones of fifes
and trumpets would produce, a paroxysm, that was perhaps but slight
in itself, might, in many cases, be increased to the most outrageous
fury, such as in later times, was purposely induced in order that
the force of the disease might be exhausted by the violence of its
attack. Moreover, by means of intoxicating music a kind of demoniacal
festival for the rude multitude was established, which had the effect
of spreading this unhappy malady wider and wider. Soft harmony was,
however, employed to calm the excitement of those affected, and it is
mentioned as a character of the tunes played with this view to the St.
Vitus’s dancers, that they contained transitions from a quick to a
slow measure, and passed gradually from a high to a low key[243]. It
is to be regretted that no trace of this music has reached our times,
which is owing partly to the disastrous events of the seventeenth
century, and partly to the circumstance that the disorder was looked
upon as entirely national, and only incidentally considered worthy
of notice by foreign men of learning. If the St. Vitus’s dance was
already on the decline at the commencement of the seventeenth century,
the subsequent events were altogether adverse to its continuance. Wars
carried on with animosity and with various success for thirty years,
shook the west of Europe; and although the unspeakable calamities which
they brought upon Germany, both during their continuance, and in their
immediate consequences, were by no means favourable to the advance of
knowledge, yet, with the vehemence of a purifying fire, they gradually
effected the intellectual regeneration of the Germans; superstition, in
her ancient form, never again appeared, and the belief in the dominion
of spirits, which prevailed in the middle ages, lost for ever its once
formidable power.





                        DANCING MANIA IN ITALY.



It was of the utmost advantage to the St. Vitus’s dancers that
they made choice of a favourite patron saint; for, not to mention
that people were inclined to compare them to the possessed with
evil spirits, described in the Bible, and thence to consider them
as innocent victims to the power of Satan, the name of their great
intercessor recommended them to general commiseration, and a magic
boundary was thus set to every harsh feeling which might otherwise have
proved hostile to their safety. Other fanatics were not so fortunate,
being often treated with the most relentless cruelty whenever the
notions of the middle ages either excused or commanded it as a
religious duty[244].

Thus, passing over the innumerable instances of the burning of witches,
who were, after all, only labouring under a delusion, the Teutonic
knights in Prussia not unfrequently condemned those maniacs to the
stake who imagined themselves to be metamorphosed into wolves[245]—an
extraordinary species of insanity, which, having existed in Greece,
before our era, spread, in process of time, over Europe, so that it
was communicated not only to the Romaic, but also to the German and
Sarmatian nations, and descended from the ancients, as a legacy of
affliction to posterity. In modern times, Lycanthropy, such was the
name given to this infatuation, has vanished from the earth, but it
is nevertheless well worthy the consideration of the observer of
human aberrations, and a history of it by some writer who is equally
well acquainted with the middle ages as with antiquity is still a
desideratum[246]. We leave it, for the present, without further
notice, and turn to a malady most extraordinary in all its phenomena,
having a close connexion with the St. Vitus’s dance, and, by a
comparison of facts, which are altogether similar, affording us an
instructive subject for contemplation. We allude to the disease called
Tarantism, which made its first appearance in Apulia, and thence spread
over the other provinces of Italy, where, during some centuries, it
prevailed as a great epidemic. In the present times it has vanished,
or at least has lost altogether its original importance, like the St.
Vitus’s dance, lycanthropy, and witchcraft.



The learned Nicholas Perotti[247] gives the earliest account of this
strange disorder. Nobody had the least doubt that it was caused by
the bite of the _tarantula_[248][249], a ground-spider common in
Apulia; and the fear of this insect was so general, that its bite was
in all probability much oftener imagined, or the sting of some other
kind of insect mistaken for it, than actually received. The word
_tarantula_ is apparently the same as _terrantola_, a name given by
the Italians to the stellio of the old Romans, which was a kind of
lizard[250], said to be poisonous, and invested by credulity with such
extraordinary qualities, that, like the serpent of the Mosaic account
of the Creation, it personified, in the imaginations of the vulgar, the
notion of cunning, so that even the jurists designated a cunning fraud
by the appellation of a “stellionatus”[251]. Perotti expressly assures
us that this reptile was called by the Romans _tarantula_; and since
he himself, who was one of the most distinguished authors of his time,
strangely confounds spiders and lizards together, so that he considers
the Apulian tarantula, which he ranks among the class of spiders, to
have the same meaning as the kind of lizard, called ἀσκαλαβώτης[252],
it is the less extraordinary that the unlearned country people of
Apulia should confound the much dreaded ground-spider with the fabulous
star-lizard[253], and appropriate to the one the name of the other. The
derivation of the word tarantula, from the city of Tarentum, or the
river Thara, in Apulia[254], on the banks of which this insect is said
to have been most frequently found, or at least its bite to have had
the most venomous effect, seems not to be supported by authority. So
much for the name of this famous spider, which, unless we are greatly
mistaken, throws no light whatever upon the nature of the disease in
question. Naturalists who, possessing a knowledge of the past, should
not misapply their talents by employing them in establishing the dry
distinction of forms, would find here much that calls for research, and
their efforts would clear up many a perplexing obscurity.

Perotti states that the tarantula, that is, the spider so called,
was not met with in Italy in former times, but that in his day it
had become common, especially in Apulia, as well as in some other
districts. He deserves, however, no great confidence as a naturalist,
notwithstanding his having delivered lectures in Bologna on medicine
and other sciences[255]. He at least has neglected to prove his
assertion, which is not borne out by any analogous phenomenon observed
in modern times with regard to the history of the spider species. It
is by no means to be admitted that the tarantula did not make its
appearance in Italy before the disease ascribed to its bite became
remarkable, even though tempests more violent than those unexampled
storms which arose at the time of the Black Death[256] in the middle
of the fourteenth century had set the insect world in motion; for the
spider is little, if at all, susceptible of those cosmical influences
which at times multiply locusts and other winged insects to a wonderful
extent, and compel them to migrate.

The symptoms which Perotti enumerates as consequent on the bite of the
tarantula agree very exactly with those described by later writers.
Those who were bitten, generally fell into a state of melancholy, and
appeared to be stupified, and scarcely in possession of their senses.
This condition was, in many cases, united with so great a sensibility
to music, that, at the very first tones of their favourite melodies,
they sprang up, shouting for joy, and danced on without intermission,
until they sank to the ground exhausted and almost lifeless. In others,
the disease did not take this cheerful turn. They wept constantly, and
as if pining away with some unsatisfied desire, spent their days in the
greatest misery and anxiety. Others, again, in morbid fits of love,
cast their longing looks on women, and instances of death are recorded,
which are said to have occurred under a paroxysm of either laughing or
weeping.

From this description, incomplete as it is, we may easily gather that
tarantism, the essential symptoms of which are mentioned in it, could
not have originated in the fifteenth century, to which Perotti’s
account refers; for that author speaks of it as a well known malady,
and states that the omission to notice it by older writers, was to be
ascribed solely to the want of education in Apulia, the only province
probably where the disease at that time prevailed. A nervous disorder
that had arrived at so high a degree of development, must have been
long in existence, and doubtless had required an elaborate preparation
by the concurrence of general causes.

The symptoms which followed the bite of venomous spiders were well
known to the ancients, and had excited the attention of their best
observers, who agree in their descriptions of them. It is probable
that among the numerous species of their phalangium[257], the Apulian
tarantula is included, but it is difficult to determine this point with
certainty, more especially, because in Italy the tarantula was not the
only insect which caused this nervous affection, similar results being
likewise attributed to the bite of the scorpion. Lividity of the whole
body as well as of the countenance, difficulty of speech, tremor of
the limbs, icy coldness, pale urine, depression of spirits, headache,
a flow of tears, nausea, vomiting, sexual excitement, flatulence,
syncope, dysuria, watchfulness, lethargy, even death itself, were cited
by them as the consequences of being bitten by venomous spiders, and
they made little distinction as to their kinds. To these symptoms we
may add the strange rumour, repeated throughout the middle ages, that
persons who were bitten, ejected by the bowels and kidneys, and even by
vomiting, substances resembling a spider’s web.

Nowhere, however, do we find any mention made that those affected felt
an irresistible propensity to dancing, or that they were accidentally
cured by it. Even Constantine of Africa, who lived 500 years after
Aëtius, and as the most learned physician of the school of Salerno,
would certainly not have passed over so acceptable a subject of
remark, knows nothing of such a memorable course of this disease
arising from poison, and merely repeats the observations of his
Greek predecessors[258]. Gariopontus[259], a Salernian physician of
the eleventh century, was the first to describe a kind of insanity,
the remote affinity of which to the tarantula disease is rendered
apparent by a very striking symptom. The patients in their sudden
attacks behaved like maniacs, sprang up, throwing their arms about
with wild movements, and, if perchance a sword was at hand, they
wounded themselves and others, so that it became necessary carefully
to secure them. They imagined that they heard voices, and various
kinds of sounds, and if, during this state of illusion, the tones of
a favourite instrument happened to catch their ear, they commenced a
spasmodic dance, or ran with the utmost energy which they could muster
until they were totally exhausted. These dangerous maniacs, who, it
would seem, appeared in considerable numbers, were looked upon as a
legion of devils, but on the causes of their malady this obscure writer
adds nothing further than that he believes (oddly enough) that it may
sometimes be excited by the bite of a mad dog. He calls the disease
Anteneasmus, by which is meant no doubt the Enthusiasmus of the Greek
physicians[260]. We cite this phenomenon as an important forerunner
of Tarantism, under the conviction that we have thus added to the
evidence that the development of this latter must have been founded
on circumstances which existed from the twelfth to the end of the
fourteenth century; for the origin of Tarantism itself is referrible,
with the utmost probability, to a period between the middle and the
end of this century, and is consequently contemporaneous with that of
the St. Vitus’s dance (1374). The influence of the Roman Catholic
religion, connected as this was, in the middle ages, with the pomp of
processions, with public exercises of penance, and with innumerable
practices which strongly excited the imaginations of its votaries,
certainly brought the mind to a very favourable state for the reception
of a nervous disorder. Accordingly, so long as the doctrines of
Christianity were blended with so much mysticism, these unhallowed
disorders prevailed to an important extent, and even in our own days
we find them propagated with the greatest facility where the existence
of superstition produces the same effect in more limited districts, as
it once did among whole nations. But this is not all. Every country in
Europe, and Italy perhaps more than any other, was visited during the
middle ages by frightful plagues, which followed each other in such
quick succession, that they gave the exhausted people scarcely any
time for recovery. The oriental bubo-plague ravaged Italy[261] sixteen
times between the years 1119 and 1340. Small-pox and measles were still
more destructive than in modern times, and recurred as frequently. St.
Anthony’s fire was the dread of town and country; and that disgusting
disease, the leprosy, which, in consequence of the crusades, spread
its insinuating poison in all directions, snatched from the paternal
hearth innumerable victims who, banished from human society, pined away
in lonely huts, whither they were accompanied only by the pity of the
benevolent and their own despair. All these calamities, of which the
moderns have scarcely retained any recollection, were heightened to
an incredible degree by the Black Death[262], which spread boundless
devastation and misery over Italy. Men’s minds were everywhere morbidly
sensitive; and as it happens with individuals whose senses, when they
are suffering under anxiety, become more irritable, so that trifles are
magnified into objects of great alarm, and slight shocks, which would
scarcely affect the spirits when in health, give rise in them to severe
diseases, so was it with this whole nation, at all times so alive to
emotions, and at that period so sorely pressed with the horrors of
death.

The bite of venomous spiders, or rather the unreasonable fear of its
consequences, excited at such a juncture, though it could not have
done so at an earlier period, a violent nervous disorder, which,
like St. Vitus’s dance in Germany, spread by sympathy, increasing
in severity as it took a wider range, and still further extending
its ravages from its long continuance. Thus, from the middle of the
fourteenth century, the furies of _the Dance_ brandished their scourge
over afflicted mortals; and music, for which the inhabitants of Italy,
now probably for the first time, manifested susceptibility and talent,
became capable of exciting ecstatic attacks in those affected, and then
furnished the magical means of exorcising their melancholy.



At the close of the fifteenth century we find that Tarantism had
spread beyond the boundaries of Apulia, and that the fear of being
bitten by venomous spiders had increased. Nothing short of death
itself was expected from the wound which these insects inflicted, and
if those who were bitten escaped with their lives, they were said to
be seen pining away in a desponding state of lassitude. Many became
weak-sighted or hard of hearing, some lost the power of speech, and
all were insensible to ordinary causes of excitement. Nothing but
the flute or the cithern afforded them relief[263]. At the sound of
these instruments they awoke as it were by enchantment, opened their
eyes, and moving slowly at first, according to the measure of the
music, were, as the time quickened, gradually hurried on to the most
passionate dance. It was generally observable that country people,
who were rude, and ignorant of music, evinced on these occasions an
unusual degree of grace, as if they had been well practised in elegant
movements of the body; for it is a peculiarity in nervous disorders
of this kind, that the organs of motion are in an altered condition,
and are completely under the control of the over-strained spirits.
Cities and villages alike resounded throughout the summer season with
the notes of fifes, clarinets, and Turkish drums; and patients were
everywhere to be met with who looked to dancing as their only remedy.
Alexander ab Alexandro[264], who gives this account, saw a young man in
a remote village who was seized with a violent attack of Tarantism. He
listened with eagerness and a fixed stare to the sound of a drum, and
his graceful movements gradually became more and more violent, until
his dancing was converted into a succession of frantic leaps, which
required the utmost exertion of his whole strength. In the midst of
this over-strained exertion of mind and body the music suddenly ceased,
and he immediately fell powerless to the ground, where he lay senseless
and motionless until its magical effect again aroused him to a renewal
of his impassioned performances.

At the period of which we are treating there was a general conviction,
that by music and dancing the poison of the Tarantula was distributed
over the whole body, and expelled through the skin, but that if there
remained the slightest vestige of it in the vessels, this became a
permanent germ of the disorder, so that the dancing fits might again
and again be excited _ad infinitum_ by music. This belief, which
resembled the delusion of those insane persons who, being by artful
management freed from the imagined causes of their sufferings, are but
for a short time released from their false notions, was attended with
the most injurious effects: for in consequence of it those affected
necessarily became by degrees convinced of the incurable nature of
their disorder. They expected relief, indeed, but not a cure, from
music; and when the heat of summer awakened a recollection of the
dances of the preceding year, they, like the St. Vitus’s dancers
of the same period before St. Vitus’s day, again grew dejected
and misanthropic, until, by music and dancing, they dispelled the
melancholy which had become with them a kind of sensual enjoyment.

Under such favourable circumstances it is clear that Tarantism must
every year have made further progress. The number of those affected by
it increased beyond all belief, for whoever had either actually been,
or even fancied that he had been, once bitten by a poisonous spider or
scorpion, made his appearance annually wherever the merry notes of the
Tarantella resounded. Inquisitive females joined the throng and caught
the disease, not indeed from the poison of the spider, but from the
mental poison which they eagerly received through the eye; and thus
the cure of the _Tarantati_ gradually became established as a regular
festival of the populace, which was anticipated with impatient delight.

Without attributing more to deception and fraud than to the peculiar
nature of a progressive mental malady, it may readily be conceived
that the cases of this strange disorder now grew more frequent.
The celebrated Matthioli[265], who is worthy of entire confidence,
gives his account as an eye-witness. He saw the same extraordinary
effects produced by music as Alexandro, for, however tortured with
pain, however hopeless of relief the patients appeared, as they lay
stretched on the couch of sickness, at the very first sounds of those
melodies which made an impression on them—but this was the case only
with the Tarantellas composed expressly for the purpose—they sprang
up as if inspired with new life and spirit, and, unmindful of their
disorder, began to move in measured gestures, dancing for hours
together without fatigue, until, covered with a kindly perspiration,
they felt a salutary degree of lassitude, which relieved them for a
time at least, perhaps even for a whole year, from their dejection and
oppressive feeling of general indisposition. Alexandro’s experience of
the injurious effects resulting from a sudden cessation of the music
was generally confirmed by Matthioli. If the clarinets and drums ceased
for a single moment, which, as the most skilful players were tired out
by the patients, could not but happen occasionally, they suffered their
limbs to fall listless, again sank exhausted to the ground, and could
find no solace but in a renewal of the dance. On this account care was
taken to continue the music until exhaustion was produced; for it was
better to pay a few extra musicians, who might relieve each other,
than to permit the patient, in the midst of this curative exercise, to
relapse into so deplorable a state of suffering. The attack consequent
upon the bite of the Tarantula, Matthioli describes as varying much in
its manner. Some became morbidly exhilarated, so that they remained
for a long while without sleep, laughing, dancing, and singing in a
state of the greatest excitement. Others, on the contrary, were drowsy.
The generality felt nausea and suffered from vomiting, and some had
constant tremors. Complete mania was no uncommon occurrence, not to
mention the usual dejection of spirits and other subordinate symptoms.



Unaccountable emotions, strange desires and morbid sensual irritations
of all kinds, were as prevalent as in the St. Vitus’s dance and similar
great nervous maladies. So late as the sixteenth century patients
were seen armed with glittering swords which, during the attack, they
brandished with wild gestures, as if they were going to engage in a
fencing match[266]. Even women scorned all female delicacy[267] and,
adopting this impassioned demeanour, did the same; and this phenomenon,
as well as the excitement which the Tarantula dancers felt at the sight
of any thing with metallic lustre, was quite common up to the period
when, in modern times, the disease disappeared[268].

The abhorrence of certain colours and the agreeable sensations produced
by others, were much more marked among the excitable Italians than was
the case in the St. Vitus’s dance with the more phlegmatic Germans.
Red colours, which the St. Vitus’s dancers detested, they generally
liked, so that a patient was seldom seen who did not carry a red
handkerchief for his gratification, or greedily feast his eyes on
any articles of red clothing worn by the bystanders. Some preferred
yellow, others black colours, of which an explanation was sought,
according to the prevailing notions of the times, in the difference
of temperaments[269]. Others again were enraptured with green; and
eye-witnesses describe this rage for colours as so extraordinary, that
they can scarcely find words with which to express their astonishment.
No sooner did the patients obtain a sight of the favourite colour
than, new as the impression was, they rushed like infuriated animals
towards the object, devoured it with their eager looks, kissed and
caressed it in every possible way, and gradually resigning themselves
to softer sensations, adopted the languishing expression of enamoured
lovers, and embraced the handkerchief, or whatever other article it
might be, which was presented to them, with the most intense ardour,
while the tears streamed from their eyes as if they were completely
overwhelmed by the inebriating impression on their senses.

The dancing fits of a certain Capuchin friar in Tarentum excited so
much curiosity, that Cardinal Cajetano proceeded to the monastery,
that he might see with his own eyes what was going on. As soon as the
monk, who was in the midst of his dance, perceived the spiritual prince
clothed in his red garments, he no longer listened to the Tarantella
of the musicians, but with strange gestures endeavoured to approach
the Cardinal, as if he wished to count the very threads of his scarlet
robe, and to allay his intense longing by its odour. The interference
of the spectators, and his own respect, prevented his touching it, and
thus the irritation of his senses not being appeased, he fell into a
state of such anguish and disquietude, that he presently sank down in a
swoon, from which he did not recover until the Cardinal compassionately
gave him his cape. This he immediately seized in the greatest ecstacy,
and pressed now to his breast, now to his forehead and cheeks, and then
again commenced his dance as if in the frenzy of a love fit[270].

At the sight of colours which they disliked, patients flew into the
most violent rage, and, like the St. Vitus’s dancers when they saw red
objects, could scarcely be restrained from tearing the clothes of those
spectators who raised in them such disagreeable sensations[271].

Another no less extraordinary symptom was the ardent longing for the
sea which the patients evinced. As the St. John’s dancers of the
fourteenth century saw, in the spirit, the heavens open and display
all the splendour of the saints, so did those who were suffering under
the bite of the Tarantula feel themselves attracted to the boundless
expanse of the blue ocean, and lost themselves in its contemplation.
Some songs, which are still preserved, marked this peculiar longing,
which was moreover expressed by significant music, and was excited even
by the bare mention of the sea[272]. Some, in whom this susceptibility
was carried to the greatest pitch, cast themselves with blind fury into
the blue waves[273], as the St. Vitus’s dancers occasionally did into
rapid rivers. This condition, so opposite to the frightful state of
hydrophobia, betrayed itself in others only in the pleasure afforded
them by the sight of clear water in glasses. These they bore in their
hands while dancing, exhibiting at the same time strange movements,
and giving way to the most extravagant expressions of their feelings.
They were delighted also when, in the midst of the space allotted for
this exercise, more ample vessels, filled with water, and surrounded by
rushes and water plants, were placed, in which they bathed their heads
and arms with evident pleasure[274]. Others there were who rolled about
on the ground, and were, by their own desire, buried up to the neck in
the earth, in order to alleviate the misery of their condition, not to
mention an endless variety of other symptoms which showed the perverted
action of the nerves.

All these modes of relief, however, were as nothing in comparison with
the irresistible charms of musical sound. Attempts had indeed been
made in ancient times to mitigate the pain of sciatica[275], or the
paroxysms of mania[276], by the soft melody of the flute, and, what
is still more applicable to the present purpose, to remove the danger
arising from the bite of vipers[277] by the same means. This, however,
was tried only to a very small extent. But after being bitten by the
Tarantula, there was, according to popular opinion, no way of saving
life except by music, and it was hardly considered as an exception
to the general rule, that every now and then the bad effects of a
wound were prevented by placing a ligature on the bitten limb, or
by internal medicine, or that strong persons occasionally withstood
the effects of the poison, without the employment of any remedies at
all[278]. It was much more common, and is quite in accordance with the
nature of so exquisite a nervous disease, to hear accounts of many,
who, when bitten by the Tarantula, perished miserably because the
Tarantella, which would have afforded them deliverance, was not played
to them[279]. It was customary, therefore, so early as the commencement
of the seventeenth century, for whole bands of musicians to traverse
Italy during the summer months, and, what is quite unexampled either in
ancient or modern times, the cure of the _Tarantati_ in the different
towns and villages was undertaken on a grand scale. This season of
dancing and music was called “the women’s little carnival,”[280] for
it was women more especially who conducted the arrangements; so that
throughout the whole country they saved up their spare money, for the
purpose of rewarding the welcome musicians, and many of them neglected
their household employments to participate in this festival of the
sick. Mention is even made of one benevolent lady (Mita Lupa) who had
expended her whole fortune on this object[281].

The music itself was of a kind perfectly adapted to the nature of
the malady, and it made so deep an impression on the Italians, that
even to the present time, long since the extinction of the disorder,
they have retained the Tarantella, as a particular species of music
employed for quick lively dancing. The different kinds of Tarantella
were distinguished, very significantly, by particular names, which had
reference to the moods observed in the patients. Whence it appears that
they aimed at representing by these tunes, even the idiosyncracies of
the mind as expressed in the countenance. Thus there was one kind of
Tarantella which was called “Panno rosso,” a very lively impassioned
style of music, to which wild dithyrambic songs were adapted; another,
called “Panno verde,” which was suited to the milder excitement of the
senses, caused by green colours, and set to Idyllian songs of verdant
fields and shady groves. A third was named “Cinque tempi:” a fourth
“Moresca,” which was played to a Moorish dance; a fifth, “Catena”
and a sixth, with a very appropriate designation, “Spallata,” as if it
were only fit to be played to dancers who were lame in the shoulder.
This was the slowest and least in vogue of all[282]. For those who
loved water they took care to select love songs, which were sung to
corresponding music, and such persons delighted in hearing of gushing
springs and rushing cascades and streams[283]. It is to be regretted
that on this subject we are unable to give any further information, for
only small fragments of songs, and a very few Tarantellas, have been
preserved, which belong to a period so remote as the beginning of the
seventeenth, or at furthest the end of the sixteenth century[284].

The music was almost wholly in the Turkish style (aria Turchesca),
and the ancient songs of the peasantry of Apulia, which increased in
number annually, were well suited to the abrupt and lively notes of
the Turkish drum and the shepherd’s pipe. These two instruments were
the favourites in the country, but others of all kinds were played in
towns and villages, as an accompaniment to the dances of the patients
and the songs of the spectators. If any particular melody was disliked
by those affected, they indicated their displeasure by violent gestures
expressive of aversion. They could not endure false notes, and it
is remarkable that uneducated boors, who had never in their lives
manifested any perception of the enchanting power of harmony, acquired,
in this respect, an extremely refined sense of hearing, as if they had
been initiated into the profoundest secrets of the musical art[285].
It was a matter of every day’s experience, that patients showed a
predilection for certain Tarantellas, in preference to others, which
gave rise to the composition of a great variety of these dances. They
were likewise very capricious in their partialities for particular
instruments; so that some longed for the shrill notes of the trumpet,
others for the softest music produced by the vibration of strings[286].

Tarantism was at its greatest height in Italy in the seventeenth
century, long after the St. Vitus’s Dance of Germany had disappeared.
It was not the natives of the country only who were attacked by this
complaint. Foreigners of every colour and of every race, negroes,
gipsies, Spaniards, Albanians, were in like manner affected by it[287].
Against the effects produced by the Tarantula’s bite, or by the sight
of the sufferers, neither youth nor age afforded any protection; so
that even old men of ninety threw aside their crutches at the sound of
the Tarantella, and, as if some magic potion, restorative of youth and
vigour, were flowing through their veins, joined the most extravagant
dancers[288]. Ferdinando saw a boy five years old seized with the
dancing mania[289], in consequence of the bite of a tarantula, and,
what is almost past belief, were it not supported by the testimony of
so credible an eye-witness, even deaf people were not exempt from this
disorder, so potent in its effect was the very sight of those affected,
even without the exhilarating emotions caused by music[290].

Subordinate nervous attacks were much more frequent during this
century than at any former period, and an extraordinary icy coldness
was observed in those who were the subjects of them; so that they
did not recover their natural heat until they had engaged in violent
dancing[291]. Their anguish and sense of oppression forced from them
a cold perspiration; the secretion from the kidneys was pale[292],
and they had so great a dislike to every thing cold, that when water
was offered them they pushed it away with abhorrence. Wine, on the
contrary, they all drank willingly, without being heated by it, or
in the slightest degree intoxicated[293]. During the whole period
of the attack they suffered from spasms in the stomach, and felt a
disinclination to take food of any kind. They used to abstain some time
before the expected seizures from meat and from snails, which they
thought rendered them more severe[294], and their great thirst for wine
may, therefore, in some measure, be attributable to the want of a more
nutritious diet; yet the disorder of the nerves was evidently its chief
cause, and the loss of appetite, as well as the necessity for support
by wine, were its effects. Loss of voice, occasional blindness[295],
vertigo, complete insanity, with sleeplessness, frequent weeping
without any ostensible cause, were all usual symptoms. Many patients
found relief from being placed in swings or rocked in cradles[296];
others required to be roused from their state of suffering by severe
blows on the soles of their feet; others beat themselves, without any
intention of making a display, but solely for the purpose of allaying
the intense nervous irritation which they felt; and a considerable
number were seen with their bellies swollen[297], like those of the
St. John’s dancers, while the violence of the intestinal disorder
was indicated in others by obstinate constipation or diarrhœa and
vomiting[298]. These pitiable objects gradually lost their strength
and their colour, and creeping about with injected eyes, jaundiced
complexions, and inflated bowels, soon fell into a state of profound
melancholy, which found food and solace in the solemn tolling of the
funeral bell, and in an abode among the tombs of cemeteries, as is
related of the Lycanthropes of former times.

The persuasion of the inevitable consequences of being bitten by
the Tarantula, exercised a dominion over men’s minds which even the
healthiest and strongest could not shake off. So late as the middle
of the sixteenth century, the celebrated Fracastoro found the robust
bailiff of his landed estate groaning, and, with the aspect of a person
in the extremity of despair, suffering the very agonies of death,
from a sting in the neck, inflicted by an insect which was believed
to be a Tarantula. He kindly administered without delay, a potion of
vinegar and Armenian bole, the great remedy of those days for the
plague and all kinds of animal poisons, and the dying man was, as if by
a miracle, restored to life and the power of speech[299]. Now, since
it is quite out of the question that the bole could have any thing to
do with the result in this case, notwithstanding Fracastoro’s belief
in its virtues, we can only account for the cure by supposing, that a
confidence in so great a physician prevailed over this fatal disease
of the imagination, which would otherwise have yielded to scarcely any
other remedy except the Tarantella. Ferdinando was acquainted with
women who, for thirty years in succession, had overcome the attacks
of this disorder by a renewal of their annual dance—so long did they
maintain their belief in the yet undestroyed poison of the Tarantula’s
bite, and so long did that mental affection continue to exist, after it
had ceased to depend on any corporeal excitement[300].

Wherever we turn we find that this morbid state of mind prevailed, and
was so supported by the opinions of the age, that it needed only a
stimulus in the bite of the Tarantula, and the supposed certainty of
its very disastrous consequences, to originate this violent nervous
disorder. Even in Ferdinando’s time there were many who altogether
denied the poisonous effects of the Tarantula’s bite, whilst they
considered the disorder, which annually set Italy in commotion, to be
a melancholy depending on the imagination[301]. They dearly expiated
this scepticism, however, when they were led, with an inconsiderate
hardihood, to test their opinions by experiment; for many of them
became the subjects of severe Tarantism, and even a distinguished
prelate, Jo. Baptist Quinzato, Bishop of Foligno, having allowed
himself, by way of a joke, to be bitten by a Tarantula, could obtain
a cure in no other way than by being, through the influence of the
Tarentella, compelled to dance[302]. Others among the clergy, who
wished to shut their ears against music, because they considered
dancing derogatory to their station, fell into a dangerous state of
illness by thus delaying the crisis of the malady, and were obliged at
last to save themselves from a miserable death by submitting to the
unwelcome but sole means of cure[303]. Thus it appears that the age was
so little favourable to freedom of thought, that even the most decided
sceptics, incapable of guarding themselves against the recollection
of what had been presented to the eye, were subdued by a poison, the
powers of which they had ridiculed, and which was in itself inert in
its effect.



Different characteristics of morbidly excited vitality having been
rendered prominent by Tarantism in different individuals, it could
not but happen that other derangements of the nerves would assume the
form of this, whenever circumstances favoured such a transition.
This was more especially the case with hysteria, that proteiform and
mutable disorder, in which the imaginations, the superstitions and the
follies of all ages have been evidently reflected. The “Carnevaletto
delle Donne” appeared most opportunely for those who were hysterical.
Their disease received from it, as it had at other times from other
extraordinary customs, a peculiar direction; so that whether bitten
by the tarantula or not, they felt compelled to participate in the
dances of those affected, and to make their appearance at this
popular festival, where they had an opportunity of triumphantly
exhibiting their sufferings. Let us here pause to consider the kind
of life which the women in Italy led. Lonely, and deprived by cruel
custom of social intercourse, that fairest of all enjoyments, they
dragged on a miserable existence. Cheerfulness and an inclination
to sensual pleasures passed into compulsory idleness, and, in many,
into black despondency[304]. Their imaginations became disordered—a
pallid countenance and oppressed respiration bore testimony to their
profound sufferings. How could they do otherwise, sunk as they were
in such extreme misery, than seize the occasion to burst forth from
their prisons, and alleviate their miseries by taking part in the
delights of music. Nor should we here pass unnoticed a circumstance
which illustrates, in a remarkable degree, the psychological nature
of hysterical sufferings, namely, that many chlorotic females, by
joining the dancers at the Carnevaletto, were freed from their spasms
and oppression of breathing for the whole year, although the corporeal
cause of their malady was not removed[305]. After such a result, no one
could call their self-deception a mere imposture, and unconditionally
condemn it as such.

This numerous class of patients certainly contributed not a little to
the maintenance of the evil, for their fantastic sufferings, in which
dissimulation and reality could scarcely be distinguished even by
themselves, much less by their physicians, were imitated, in the same
way as the distortions of the St. Vitus’s dancers, by the impostors of
that period. It was certainly by these persons also that the number
of subordinate symptoms was increased to an endless extent, as may
be conceived from the daily observation of hysterical patients, who,
from a morbid desire to render themselves remarkable, deviate from the
laws of moral propriety. Powerful sexual excitement had often the most
decided influence over their condition. Many of them exposed themselves
in the most indecent manner, tore their hair out by the roots, with
howling and gnashing of their teeth; and when, as was sometimes the
case, their unsatisfied passion hurried them on to a state of frenzy,
they closed their existence by self-destruction; it being common at
that time for these unfortunate beings to precipitate themselves into
the wells[306].

It might hence seem that, owing to the conduct of patients of this
description, so much of fraud and falsehood would be mixed up with the
original disorder, that having passed into another complaint, it must
have been itself destroyed. This, however, did not happen in the first
half of the seventeenth century; for as a clear proof that Tarantism
remained substantially the same and quite unaffected by Hysteria,
there were in many places, and in particular at Messapia, fewer women
affected than men, who in their turn were, in no small proportion, led
into temptation by sexual excitement[307]. In other places, as for
example at Brindisi, the case was reversed, which may, as in other
complaints, be in some measure attributable to local causes. Upon the
whole it appears, from concurrent accounts, that women by no means
enjoyed the distinction of being attacked by Tarantism more frequently
than men.

It is said that the cicatrix of the tarantula bite, on the yearly or
half-yearly return of the fit, became discoloured[308], but on this
point the distinct testimony of good observers is wanting to deprive
the assertion of its utter improbability.

It is not out of place to remark here, that about the same time that
Tarantism attained its greatest height in Italy, the bite of venomous
spiders was more feared in distant parts of Asia likewise, than it
had ever been within the memory of man. There was this difference,
however, that the symptoms supervening on the occurrence of this
accident were not accompanied by the Apulian nervous disorder, which,
as has been shown in the foregoing pages, had its origin rather in the
melancholic temperament of the inhabitants of the south of Italy, than
in the nature of the tarantula poison itself. This poison is therefore
doubtless to be considered only as a remote cause of the complaint,
which, but for that temperament, would be inadequate to its production.
The Persians employed a very rough means of counteracting the bad
consequences of a poison of this sort. They drenched the wounded person
with milk, and then, by violent rotatory motion in a suspended box,
compelled him to vomit[309].



The Dancing Mania, arising from the tarantula bite, continued, with all
those additions of self-deception, and of the dissimulation which is
such a constant attendant on nervous disorders of this kind, through
the whole course of the seventeenth century. It was indeed gradually
on the decline, but up to the termination of this period, showed such
extraordinary symptoms, that Baglivi, one of the best physicians of
that time, thought he did a service to science by making them the
subject of a dissertation[310]. He repeats all the observations of
Ferdinando, and supports his own assertions by the experience of his
father, a physician at Lecce, whose testimony, as an eye-witness, may
be admitted as unexceptionable[311].

The immediate consequences of the tarantula bite, the supervening
nervous disorder, and the aberrations and fits of those who suffered
from Hysteria, he describes in a masterly style, nor does he ever
suffer his credulity to diminish the authenticity of his account, of
which he has been unjustly accused by later writers.

Finally, Tarantism has declined more and more in modern times, and is
now limited to single cases. How could it possibly have maintained
itself unchanged in the eighteenth century, when all the links which
connected it with the middle ages had long since been snapped asunder?
Imposture[312] grew more frequent, and wherever the disease still
appeared in its genuine form, its chief cause, namely, a peculiar cast
of melancholy, which formerly had been the temperament of thousands,
was now possessed only occasionally by unfortunate individuals. It
might therefore not unreasonably be maintained, that the Tarantism of
modern times bears nearly the same relation to the original malady, as
the St. Vitus’s dance which still exists, and certainly has all along
existed, bears, in certain cases, to the original dancing mania of the
dancers of St. John.

To conclude. Tarantism, as a real disease, has been denied _in toto_,
and stigmatized as an imposition, by most physicians and naturalists,
who in this controversy have shown the narrowness of their views and
their utter ignorance of history. In order to support their opinion
they have instituted some experiments, apparently favourable to it,
but under circumstances altogether inapplicable, since, for the most
part, they selected, as the subjects of them, none but healthy men,
who were totally uninfluenced by a belief in this once so dreaded
disease. From individual instances of fraud and dissimulation, such as
are found in connexion with most nervous affections without rendering
their reality a matter of any doubt, they drew a too hasty conclusion
respecting the general phenomenon, of which they appeared not to know,
that it had continued for nearly four hundred years, having originated
in the remotest periods of the middle ages. The most learned and the
most acute among these sceptics is Serao the Neapolitan[313]. His
reasonings amount to this, that he considers the disease to be a very
marked form of melancholia, and compares the effect of the tarantula
bite upon it to stimulating, with spurs, a horse which is already
running. The reality of that effect he thus admits, and therefore
directly confirms what in appearance only he denies[314]. By shaking
the already vacillating belief in this disorder he is said to have
actually succeeded in rendering it less frequent, and in setting bounds
to imposture[315]; but this no more disproves the reality of its
existence, than the oft-repeated detection of imposition has been able,
in modern times, to banish magnetic sleep from the circle of natural
phenomena, though such detection has, on its side, rendered more rare
the incontestible effects of animal magnetism. Other physicians and
naturalists[316] have delivered their sentiments on Tarantism, but as
they have not possessed an enlarged knowledge of its history, their
views do not merit particular exposition. It is sufficient for the
comprehension of every one, that we have presented the facts freed from
all extraneous speculation.





                      DANCING MANIA IN ABYSSINIA.



Both the St. Vitus’s dance and Tarantism belonged to the ages in which
they appeared. They could not have existed under the same latitude at
any other epoch, for at no other period were the circumstances which
prepared the way for them combined in a similar relation to each other,
and the mental as well as corporeal temperaments of nations, which
depend on causes such as have been stated, are as little capable of
renewal as the different stages of life in individuals. This gives
so much the more importance to a disease but cursorily alluded to
in the foregoing pages, which exists in Abyssinia, and which nearly
resembles the original mania of the St. John’s dancers, inasmuch as it
exhibits a perfectly similar ecstacy, with the same violent effect on
the nerves of motion. It occurs most frequently in the Tigrè country,
being thence called Tigretier, and is probably the same malady which is
called in the Æthiopian language Astarāgaza[317]. On this subject we
will introduce the testimony of Nathaniel Pearce[318], an eye-witness,
who resided nine years in Abyssinia. “The Tigretier,” says he, “is
more common among the women than among the men. It seizes the body as
if with a violent fever, and from that turns to a lingering sickness,
which reduces the patients to skeletons, and often kills them, if the
relations cannot procure the proper remedy. During this sickness their
speech is changed to a kind of stuttering, which no one can understand
but those afflicted with the same disorder. When the relations find
the malady to be the real _tigretier_, they join together to defray
the expenses of curing it; the first remedy they in general attempt,
is to procure the assistance of a learned Dofter, who reads the Gospel
of St. John[319], and drenches the patient with cold water daily for
the space of seven days—an application that very often proves fatal.
The most effectual cure, though far more expensive than the former, is
as follows:—The relations hire, for a certain sum of money, a band of
trumpeters, drummers and fifers, and buy a quantity of liquor; then all
the young men and women of the place assemble at the patient’s house,
to perform the following most extraordinary ceremony.

“I was once called in by a neighbour to see his wife, a very young
woman, who had the misfortune to be afflicted with this disorder; and
the man being an old acquaintance of mine, and always a close comrade
in the camp, I went every day when at home to see her, but I could not
be of any service to her, though she never refused my medicines. At
this time, I could not understand a word she said, although she talked
very freely, nor could any of her relations understand her. She could
not bear the sight of a book or a priest, for at the sight of either,
she struggled, and was apparently seized with acute agony, and a flood
of tears, like blood mingled with water, would pour down her face from
her eyes. She had lain three months in this lingering state, living
upon so little that it seemed not enough to keep a human body alive;
at last, her husband agreed to employ the usual remedy, and, after
preparing for the maintenance of the band, during the time it would
take to effect the cure, he borrowed from all his neighbours their
silver ornaments, and loaded her legs, arms, and neck with them.

“The evening that the band began to play, I seated myself close by
her side as she lay upon the couch, and about two minutes after the
trumpets had begun to sound, I observed her shoulders begin to move,
and soon afterwards her head and breast, and in less than a quarter
of an hour, she sat upon her couch. The wild look she had, though
sometimes she smiled, made me draw off to a greater distance, being
almost alarmed to see one nearly a skeleton move with such strength:
her head, neck, shoulders, hands and feet, all made a strong motion
to the sound of the music, and in this manner she went on by degrees,
until she stood up on her legs upon the floor. Afterwards she began to
dance, and at times to jump about, and at last, as the music and noise
of the singers increased, she often sprang three feet from the ground.
When the music slackened, she would appear quite out of temper, but
when it became louder, she would smile and be delighted. During this
exercise, she never showed the least symptom of being tired, though the
musicians were thoroughly exhausted; and when they stopped to refresh
themselves by drinking and resting a little, she would discover signs
of discontent.

“Next day, according to the custom in the cure of this disorder,
she was taken into the market-place, where several jars of _maize_
or _tsug_ were set in order by the relations, to give drink to the
musicians and dancers. When the crowd had assembled and the music was
ready, she was brought forth and began to dance and throw herself into
the maddest postures imaginable, and in this manner she kept on the
whole day. Towards evening, she began to let fall her silver ornaments
from her neck, arms, and legs, one at a time, so that, in the course of
three hours, she was stripped of every article. A relation continually
kept going after her as she danced, to pick up the ornaments, and
afterwards delivered them to the owners from whom they were borrowed.
As the sun went down, she made a start with such swiftness, that the
fastest runner could not come up with her, and when at the distance
of about two hundred yards, she dropped on a sudden, as if shot. Soon
afterwards, a young man, on coming up with her, fired a matchlock over
her body, and struck her upon the back with the broad side of his large
knife, and asked her name, to which she answered as when in her common
senses—a sure proof of her being cured; for, during the time of this
malady, those afflicted with it never answer to their Christian names.
She was now taken up in a very weak condition and carried home, and a
priest came and baptized her again in the name of the Father, Son, and
Holy Ghost, which ceremony concluded her cure. Some are taken in this
manner to the market-place for many days before they can be cured, and
it sometimes happens that they cannot be cured at all. I have seen
them in these fits dance with a _bruly_, or bottle of maize, upon
their heads, without spilling the liquor, or letting the bottle fall,
although they have put themselves into the most extravagant postures.

“I could not have ventured to write this from hearsay, nor could
I conceive it possible, until I was obliged to put this remedy in
practice upon my own wife[320], who was seized with the same disorder,
and then I was compelled to have a still nearer view of this strange
disorder. I at first thought that a whip would be of some service, and
one day attempted a few strokes when unnoticed by any person, we being
by ourselves, and I having a strong suspicion that this ailment sprang
from the weak minds of women, who were encouraged in it for the sake
of the grandeur, rich dress, and music which accompany the cure. But
how much was I surprised, the moment I struck a light blow, thinking to
do good, to find that she became like a corpse, and even the joints of
her fingers became so stiff that I could not straighten them; indeed,
I really thought that she was dead, and immediately made it known to
the people in the house that she had fainted, but did not tell them the
cause, upon which they immediately brought music, which I had for many
days denied them, and which soon revived her; and I then left the house
to her relations to cure her at my expense, in the manner I have before
mentioned, though it took a much longer time to cure my wife than the
woman I have just given an account of. One day I went privately, with
a companion, to see my wife dance, and kept at a short distance, as
I was ashamed to go near the crowd. On looking stedfastly upon her,
while dancing or jumping more like a deer than a human being, I said
that it certainly was not my wife; at which my companion burst into
a fit of laughter, from which he could scarcely refrain all the way
home. Men are sometimes afflicted with this dreadful disorder, but not
frequently. Among the Amhara and Galla it is not so common.”

Such is the account of Pearce, who is every way worthy of credit,
and whose lively description renders the traditions of former times
respecting the St. Vitus’s dance and Tarantism intelligible even
to those who are sceptical respecting the existence of a morbid
state of the mind and body of the kind described, because, in the
present advanced state of civilization among the nations of Europe,
opportunities for its development no longer occur. The credibility
of this energetic, but by no means ambitious man, is not liable to
the slightest suspicion, for, owing to his want of education, he had
no knowledge of the phenomenon in question, and his work evinces
throughout his attractive and unpretending impartiality.

Comparison is the mother of observation, and may here elucidate one
phenomena by another—the past by that which still exists. Oppression,
insecurity, and the influence of a very rude priestcraft, are the
powerful causes which operated on the Germans and Italians of the
middle ages, as they now continue to operate on the Abyssinians of the
present day. However these people may differ from us in their descent,
their manners and their customs, the effects of the above-mentioned
causes are the same in Africa as they were in Europe, for they operate
on man himself independently of the particular locality in which he may
be planted; and the condition of the Abyssinians of modern times is,
in regard to superstition, a mirror of the condition of the European
nations in the middle ages. Should this appear a bold assertion, it
will be strengthened by the fact, that in Abyssinia, two examples
of superstitions occur, which are completely in accordance with
occurrences of the middle ages that took place contemporarily with the
dancing mania. _The Abyssinians have their Christian flagellants, and
there exists among them a belief in a Zoomorphism, which presents a
lively image of the lycanthropy of the middle ages._ Their flagellants
are called Zackarys. They are united into a separate Christian
fraternity, and make their processions through the towns and villages
with great noise and tumult, scourging themselves till they draw blood,
and wounding themselves with knives[321]. They boast that they are
descendants of St. George. It is precisely in Tigrè, the country of the
Abyssinian dancing mania, where they are found in the greatest numbers,
and where they have, in the neighbourhood of Axum, a church of their
own, dedicated to their patron saint _Oun Arvel_. Here there is an
ever-burning lamp, and they contrive to impress a belief that this is
kept alight by supernatural means. They also here keep a holy water,
which is said to be a cure for those who are affected by the dancing
mania.

The Abyssinian Zoomorphism is a no less important phenomenon, and shows
itself in a manner quite peculiar. The blacksmiths and potters form,
among the Abyssinians, a society, or caste called in Tigrè _Tebbib_,
and in Amhara _Buda_, which is held in some degree of contempt, and
excluded from the sacrament of the Lord’s Supper, because it is
believed that they can change themselves into hyænas and other beasts
of prey, on which account they are feared by every body, and regarded
with horror. They artfully contrive to keep up this superstition,
because by this separation they preserve a monopoly of their lucrative
trades, and as in other respects they are good Christians, (but few
Jews or Mahomedans live among them,) they seem to attach no great
consequence to their excommunication. As a badge of distinction, they
wear a golden earring, which is frequently found in the ears of hyænas
that are killed, without its having ever been discovered how they catch
these animals, so as to decorate them with this strange ornament,
and this removes, in the minds of the people, all doubt as to the
supernatural powers of the smiths and potters[322]. To the budas is
also ascribed the gift of enchantment, especially that of the influence
of the evil eye[323]. They nevertheless live unmolested, and are not
condemned to the flames by fanatical priests, as the lycanthropes were
in the middle ages.





                               SYMPATHY.


Imitation—compassion—sympathy, these are imperfect designations for a
common bond of union among human beings—for an instinct which connects
individuals with the general body, which embraces with equal force,
reason and folly, good and evil, and diminishes the praise of virtue
as well as the criminality of vice. In this impulse there are degrees,
but no essential differences, from the first intellectual efforts of
the infant mind, which are in a great measure based on imitation, to
that morbid condition of the soul in which the sensible impression of
a nervous malady fetters the mind, and finds its way, through the eye,
directly to the diseased texture, as the electric shock is propagated
by contact from body to body. To this instinct of imitation, when it
exists in its highest degree, is united a loss of all power over the
will, which occurs as soon as the impression on the senses has become
firmly established, producing a condition like that of small animals
when they are fascinated by the look of a serpent. By this mental
bondage, morbid sympathy is clearly and definitely distinguished from
all subordinate degrees of this instinct, however closely allied the
imitation of a disorder may seem to be to that of a mere folly, of an
absurd fashion, of an awkward habit in speech and manner, or even of a
confusion of ideas. Even these latter imitations, however, directed as
they are to foolish and pernicious objects, place the self-independence
of the greater portion of mankind in a very doubtful light, and account
for their union into a social whole. Still more nearly allied to morbid
sympathy than the imitation of enticing folly, although often with
a considerable admixture of the latter, is the diffusion of violent
excitements, especially those of a religious or political character,
which have so powerfully agitated the nations of ancient and modern
times, and which may, after an incipient compliance[324], pass into a
total loss of power over the will, and an actual disease of the mind.
Far be it from us to attempt to awaken all the various tones of this
chord, whose vibrations reveal the profound secrets which lie hid in
the inmost recesses of the soul. We might well want powers adequate
to so vast an undertaking. Our business here is only with that morbid
sympathy, by the aid of which the dancing mania of the middle ages grew
into a real epidemic. In order to make this apparent by comparison, it
may not be out of place, at the close of this inquiry, to introduce a
few striking examples:—

1. “At a cotton manufactory at Hodden Bridge, in Lancashire, a girl, on
the fifteenth of February 1787, put a mouse into the bosom of another
girl, who had a great dread of mice. The girl was immediately thrown
into a fit, and continued in it, with the most violent convulsions, for
twenty-four hours. On the following day, three more girls were seized
in the same manner; and on the 17th, six more. By this time, the alarm
was so great, that the whole work, in which 200 or 300 were employed,
was totally stopped, and an idea prevailed that a particular disease
had been introduced by a bag of cotton opened in the house. On Sunday
the 18th, Dr. St. Clare was sent for from Preston; before he arrived
three more were seized, and during that night and the morning of the
19th, eleven more, making in all twenty-four. Of these, twenty-one
were young women, two were girls of about ten years of age, and one
man, who had been much fatigued with holding the girls. Three of the
number lived about two miles from the place where the disorder first
broke out, and three at another factory at Clitheroe, about five miles
distant, which last and two more were infected entirely from report,
not having seen the other patients, but, like them and the rest of the
country, strongly impressed with the idea of the plague being caught
from the cotton. The symptoms were anxiety, strangulation, and very
strong convulsions; and these were so violent as to last without any
intermission from a quarter of an hour to twenty-four hours, and to
require four or five persons to prevent the patients from tearing their
hair and dashing their heads against the floor or walls. Dr. St. Clare
had taken with him a portable electrical machine, and by electric
shocks the patients were universally relieved without exception. As
soon as the patients and the country were assured that the complaint
was merely nervous, easily cured, and not introduced by the cotton,
no fresh person was affected. To dissipate their apprehensions still
further, the best effects were obtained by causing them to take a
cheerful glass and join in a dance. On Tuesday the 20th, they danced,
and the next day were all at work, except two or three, who were much
weakened by their fits.”[325]

The occurrence here described is remarkable on this account, that there
was no important predisposing cause for convulsions in these young
women, unless we consider as such their miserable and confined life
in the work-rooms of a spinning manufactory. It did not arise from
enthusiasm, nor is it stated that the patients had been the subjects
of any other nervous disorders. In another perfectly analogous case,
those attacked were all suffering from nervous complaints, which
roused a morbid sympathy in them at the sight of a person seized with
convulsions. This, together with the supervention of hysterical fits,
may aptly enough be compared to Tarantism.

2. “A young woman of the lowest order, twenty-one years of age, and
of a strong frame, came on the 13th of January, 1801, to visit a
patient in the Charité hospital at Berlin, where she had herself
been previously under treatment for an inflammation of the chest
with tetanic spasms, and immediately on entering the ward, fell down
in strong convulsions. At the sight of her violent contortions, six
other female patients immediately became affected in the same way,
and by degrees eight more were in like manner attacked with strong
convulsions. All these patients were from sixteen to twenty-five years
of age, and suffered without exception, one from spasms in the stomach,
another from palsy, a third from lethargy, a fourth from fits with
consciousness, a fifth from catalepsy, a sixth from syncope, &c. The
convulsions, which alternate in various ways with tonic spasms, were
accompanied by loss of sensibility, and were invariably preceded by
languor with heavy sleep, which was followed by the fits in the course
of a minute or two; and it is remarkable, that in all these patients
their former nervous disorders, not excepting paralysis, disappeared,
returning, however, after the subsequent removal of their new
complaint. The treatment, during the course of which two of the nurses,
who were young women, suffered similar attacks, was continued for four
months. It was finally successful, and consisted principally in the
administration of opium, at that time the favourite remedy[326].”

Now, every species of enthusiasm, every strong affection, every violent
passion, may lead to convulsions—to mental disorders—to a concussion of
the nerves, from the sensorium to the very finest extremities of the
spinal chord. The whole world is full of examples of this afflicting
state of turmoil, which, when the mind is carried away by the force
of a sensual impression that destroys its freedom, is irresistibly
propagated by imitation. Those who are thus infected do not spare even
their own lives, but, as a hunted flock of sheep will follow their
leader and rush over a precipice, so will whole hosts of enthusiasts,
deluded by their infatuation, hurry on to a self-inflicted death. Such
has ever been the case, from the days of the Milesian virgins to the
modern associations for self-destruction[327]. Of all enthusiastic
infatuations, however, that of religion is the most fertile in
disorders of the mind as well as of the body, and both spread with the
greatest facility by sympathy. The history of the church furnishes
innumerable proofs of this, but we need go no further than the most
recent times.

3. In a Methodist chapel at Redruth, a man during divine service, cried
out with a loud voice, “What shall I do to be saved?” at the same
time manifesting the greatest uneasiness and solicitude respecting
the condition of his soul. Some other members of the congregation,
following his example, cried out in the same form of words, and seemed
shortly after to suffer the most excruciating bodily pain. This strange
occurrence was soon publicly known, and hundreds of people, who had
come thither, either attracted by curiosity, or a desire, from other
motives, to see the sufferers, fell into the same state. The chapel
remained open for some days and nights, and from that point the new
disorder spread itself, with the rapidity of lightning, over the
neighbouring towns of Camborne, Helston, Truro, Penryn, and Falmouth,
as well as over the villages in the vicinity. Whilst thus advancing,
it decreased in some measure at the place where it had first appeared,
and it confined itself throughout to the Methodist chapels. It was
only by the words which have been mentioned that it was excited, and it
seized none but people of the lowest education. Those who were attacked
betrayed the greatest anguish, and fell into convulsions; others cried
out, like persons possessed, that the Almighty would straightway pour
out his wrath upon them, that the wailings of tormented spirits rang in
their ears, and that they saw hell open to receive them. The clergy,
when in the course of their sermons, they perceived that persons
were thus seized, earnestly exhorted them to confess their sins, and
zealously endeavoured to convince them that they were by nature enemies
to Christ; that the anger of God had therefore fallen upon them; and
that if death should surprise them in the midst of their sins, the
eternal torments of hell would be their portion. The over-excited
congregation upon this repeated their words, which naturally must have
increased the fury of their convulsive attacks. When the discourse had
produced its full effect, the preacher changed his subject; reminded
those who were suffering, of the power of the Saviour, as well as
of the grace of God, and represented to them in glowing colours the
joys of heaven. Upon this a remarkable reaction sooner or later took
place. Those who were in convulsions felt themselves raised from the
lowest depths of misery and despair to the most exalted bliss, and
triumphantly shouted out that their bonds were loosed, their sins were
forgiven, and that they were translated to the wonderful freedom of the
children of God. In the mean time, their convulsions continued, and
they remained, during this condition, so abstracted from every earthly
thought, that they staid two and sometimes three days and nights
together in the chapels, agitated all the time by spasmodic movements,
and taking neither repose nor nourishment. According to a moderate
computation, 4000 people were, within a very short time, affected with
this convulsive malady.

The course and symptoms of the attacks were in general as
follows:—There came on at first a feeling of faintness, with rigour
and a sense of weight at the pit of the stomach, soon after which
the patient cried out, as if in the agonies of death or the pains
of labour. The convulsions then began, first showing themselves in
the muscles of the eyelids, though the eyes themselves were fixed
and staring. The most frightful contortions of the countenance
followed, and the convulsions now took their course downwards, so that
the muscles of the neck and trunk were affected, causing a sobbing
respiration, which was performed with great effort. Tremors and
agitation ensued, and the patients screamed out violently, and tossed
their heads about from side to side. As the complaint increased, it
seized the arms, and its victims beat their breasts, clasped their
hands, and made all sorts of strange gestures. The observer who gives
this account remarked that the lower extremities were in no instance
affected. In some cases, exhaustion came on in a very few minutes,
but the attack usually lasted much longer, and there were even cases
in which it was known to continue for sixty or seventy hours. Many of
those who happened to be seated when the attack commenced, bent their
bodies rapidly backwards and forwards during its continuance, making a
corresponding motion with their arms, like persons sawing wood. Others
shouted aloud, leaped about, and threw their bodies into every possible
posture, until they had exhausted their strength. Yawning took place
at the commencement in all cases, but as the violence of the disorder
increased, the circulation and respiration became accelerated, so
that the countenance assumed a swollen and puffed appearance. When
exhaustion came on, patients usually fainted, and remained in a stiff
and motionless state until their recovery. The disorder completely
resembled the St. Vitus’s dance, but the fits sometimes went on to
an extraordinarily violent extent, so that the author of the account
once saw a woman, who was seized with these convulsions, resist the
endeavours of four or five strong men to restrain her. Those patients
who did not lose their consciousness were in general made more furious
by every attempt to quiet them by force, on which account they were in
general suffered to continue unmolested until nature herself brought
on exhaustion. Those affected complained, more or less, of debility
after the attacks, and cases sometimes occurred in which they passed
into other disorders: thus some fell into a state of melancholy, which,
however, in consequence of their religious ecstacy, was distinguished
by the absence of fear and despair; and in one patient inflammation of
the brain is said to have taken place. No sex or age was exempt from
this epidemic malady. Children five years old and octogenarians were
alike affected by it, and even men of the most powerful frame were
subject to its influence. Girls and young women, however, were its most
frequent victims[328].

4. For the last hundred years a nervous affection of a perfectly
similar kind has existed in the Shetland Islands, which furnishes
a striking example, perhaps the only one now existing, of the very
lasting propagation by sympathy of this species of disorders. The
origin of the malady was very insignificant. An epileptic woman had a
fit in church, and whether it was that the minds of the congregation
were excited by devotion, or that, being overcome at the sight of
the strong convulsions, their sympathy was called forth, certain it
is, that many adult women, and even children, some of whom were of
the male sex, and not more than six years old, began to complain
forthwith of palpitation, followed by faintness, which passed into a
motionless and apparently cataleptic condition. These symptoms lasted
more than an hour, and probably recurred frequently. In the course of
time, however, this malady is said to have undergone a modification,
such as it exhibits at the present day. Women whom it has attacked
will suddenly fall down, toss their arms about, writhe their bodies
into various shapes, move their heads suddenly from side to side, and
with eyes fixed and staring, utter the most dismal cries. If the fit
happen on any occasion of public diversion, they will, as soon as it
has ceased, mix with their companions and continue their amusement as
if nothing had happened. Paroxysms of this kind used to prevail most
during the warm months of summer, and about fifty years ago there was
scarcely a Sabbath in which they did not occur. Strong passions of
the mind, induced by religious enthusiasm, are also exciting causes
of these fits, but like all such false tokens of divine workings,
they are easily encountered by producing in the patient a different
frame of mind, and especially by exciting a sense of shame: thus those
affected are under the control of any sensible preacher, who knows
how to “administer to a mind diseased,” and to expose the folly of
voluntarily yielding to a sympathy so easily resisted, or of inviting
such attacks by affectation. An intelligent and pious minister of
Shetland informed the physician, who gives an account of this
disorder as an eye-witness, that being considerably annoyed, on his
first introduction into the country, by these paroxysms, whereby the
devotions of the church were much impeded, he obviated their repetition
by assuring his parishioners, that no treatment was more effectual than
immersion in cold water; and as his kirk was fortunately contiguous to
a freshwater lake, he gave notice that attendants should be at hand,
during divine service, to ensure the proper means of cure. The sequel
need scarcely be told. The fear of being carried out of the church,
and into the water, acted like a charm; not a single Naiad was made,
and the worthy minister, for many years, had reason to boast of one of
the best regulated congregations in Shetland. As the physician above
alluded to was attending divine service in the kirk of Baliasta, on
the Isle of Unst, a female shriek, the indication of a convulsion fit,
was heard; the minister, Mr. Ingram, of Fetlar, very properly stopped
his discourse, until the disturber was removed; and, after advising
all those who thought they might be similarly affected, to leave the
church, he gave out, in the meantime, a psalm. The congregation was
thus preserved from further interruption; yet the effect of sympathy
was not prevented, for as the narrator of the account was leaving the
church, he saw several females writhing and tossing about their arms on
the green grass, who durst not, for fear of a censure from the pulpit,
exhibit themselves after this manner within the sacred walls of the
kirk[329].

In the production of this disorder, which no doubt still exists,
fanaticism certainly had a smaller share than the irritable state of
women out of health, who only needed excitement, no matter of what
kind, to throw them into the prevailing nervous paroxysms. When,
however, that powerful cause of nervous disorders takes the lead, we
find far more remarkable symptoms developed, and it then depends on the
mental condition of the people among whom they appear, whether in their
spread, they shall take a narrow or an extended range—whether confined
to some small knot of zealots they are to vanish without a trace, or
whether they are to attain even historical importance.

5. The appearance of the _Convulsionnaires_ in France, whose
inhabitants, from the greater mobility of their blood, have in
general been the less liable to fanaticism, is, in this respect,
instructive and worthy of attention. In the year 1727 there died, in
the capital of that country, the Deacon Pâris, a zealous opposer of the
Ultramontanists, division having arisen in the French church on account
of the bull “Unigenitus.” People made frequent visits to his tomb, in
the cemetery of St. Medard, and four years afterwards, (in September,
1731,) a rumour was spread, that miracles took place there. Patients
were seized with convulsions and tetanic spasms, rolled upon the ground
like persons possessed, were thrown into violent contortions of their
heads and limbs, and suffered the greatest oppression, accompanied by
quickness and irregularity of pulse. This novel occurrence excited
the greatest sensation all over Paris, and an immense concourse of
people resorted daily to the above named cemetery, in order to see
so wonderful a spectacle, which the Ultramontanists immediately
interpreted as a work of Satan, while their opponents ascribed it to a
divine influence. The disorder soon increased, until it produced, in
nervous women, _clairvoyance_, (_Schlafwachen_,) a phenomenon till then
unknown; for one female especially attracted attention, who blindfold,
and, as it was believed, by means of the sense of smell, read every
writing that was placed before her, and distinguished the characters of
unknown persons. The very earth taken from the grave of the Deacon, was
soon thought to possess miraculous power. It was sent to numerous sick
persons at a distance, whereby they were said to have been cured, and
thus this nervous disorder spread far beyond the limits of the capital,
so that at one time it was computed that there were more than eight
hundred decided _Convulsionnaires_, who would hardly have increased
so much in numbers, had not Louis XV. directed that the cemetery
should be closed[330]. The disorder itself assumed various forms,
and augmented, by its attacks, the general excitement. Many persons,
besides suffering from the convulsions, became the subjects of violent
pain, which required the assistance of their brethren of the faith. On
this account they, as well as those who afforded them aid, were called
by the common title of _Secourists_. The modes of relief adopted were
remarkably in accordance with those which were administered to the
St. John’s dancers and the Tarantati, and they were in general very
rough; for the sufferers were beaten and goaded in various parts of
the body with stones, hammers, swords, clubs, &c., of which treatment
the defenders of this extraordinary sect relate the most astonishing
examples, in proof that severe pain is imperatively demanded by nature
in this disorder, as an effectual counter-irritant. The Secourists used
wooden clubs, in the same manner as paviors use their mallets, and it
is stated that some Convulsionnaires have borne daily from six to eight
thousand blows, thus inflicted, without danger[331]. One Secourist
administered to a young woman, who was suffering under spasm of the
stomach, the most violent blows on that part, not to mention other
similar cases, which occurred everywhere in great numbers. Sometimes
the patients bounded from the ground, impelled by the convulsions,
like fish when out of water; and this was so frequently imitated at a
later period, that the women and girls, when they expected such violent
contortions, not wishing to appear indecent, put on gowns, made like
sacks, closed at the feet. If they received any bruises by falling
down, they were healed with earth from the grave of the uncanonized
saint. They usually, however, showed great agility in this respect,
and it is scarcely necessary to remark that the female sex especially
was distinguished by all kinds of leaping, and almost inconceivable
contortions of body. Some spun round on their feet with incredible
rapidity, as is related of the dervishes; others ran their heads
against walls, or curved their bodies like rope-dancers, so that their
heels touched their shoulders.

All this degenerated at length into decided insanity. A certain
Convulsionnaire, at Vernon, who had formerly led rather a loose course
of life, employed herself in confessing the other sex; in other places
women of this sect were seen imposing exercises of penance on priests,
during which these were compelled to kneel before them. Others played
with children’s rattles, or drew about small carts, and gave to these
childish acts symbolical significations[332]. One Convulsionnaire
even made believe to shave her chin, and gave religious instruction
at the same time, in order to imitate Pâris, the worker of miracles,
who, during this operation, and whilst at table, was in the habit of
preaching. Some had a board placed across their bodies, upon which a
whole row of men stood; and as, in this unnatural state of mind, a
kind of pleasure is derived from excruciating pain, some too were seen
who caused their bosoms to be pinched with tongs, while others, with
gowns closed at the feet, stood upon their heads, and remained in that
position longer than would have been possible had they been in health.
Pinault, the advocate, who belonged to this sect, barked like a dog
some hours every day, and even this found imitation among the believers.

The insanity of the Convulsionnaires lasted, without interruption,
until the year 1790, and during these fifty-nine years, called
forth more lamentable phenomena than the enlightened spirits of the
eighteenth century would be willing to allow. The grossest immorality
found, in the secret meetings of the believers, a sure sanctuary, and,
in their bewildering devotional exercises, a convenient cloak. It was
of no avail that, in the year 1762, the Grands Secours was forbidden by
act of parliament; for thenceforth this work was carried on in secrecy,
and with greater zeal than ever; it was in vain, too, that some
physicians, and, among the rest, the austere, pious Hecquet[333], and
after him Lorry[334], attributed the conduct of the Convulsionnaires
to natural causes. Men of distinction among the upper classes, as,
for instance, Montgeron the deputy, and Lambert an ecclesiastic (obt.
1813), stood forth as the defenders of this sect; and the numerous
writings[335] which were exchanged on the subject, served, by the
importance which they thus attached to it, to give it stability. The
revolution, finally, shook the structure of this pernicious mysticism.
It was not, however, destroyed; for, even during the period of the
greatest excitement, the secret meetings were still kept up; prophetic
books, by Convulsionnaires of various denominations, have appeared
even in the most recent times, and only a few years ago (in 1828) this
once celebrated sect still existed, although without the convulsions
and the extraordinarily rude aid of the brethren of the faith, which,
amidst the boasted pre-eminence of French intellectual advancement,
remind us most forcibly of the dark ages of the St. John’s dancers[336].

6. Similar fanatical sects exhibit among all nations[337] of ancient
and modern times the same phenomena. An over-strained bigotry is,
in itself, and considered in a medical point of view, a destructive
irritation of the senses, which draws men away from the efficiency of
mental freedom, and peculiarly favours the most injurious emotions.
Sensual ebullitions, with strong convulsions of the nerves, appear
sooner or later[338], and insanity, suicidal disgust of life,
and incurable nervous disorders[339], are but too frequently the
consequences of a perverse, and, indeed, hypocritical zeal, which has
ever prevailed, as well in the assemblies of the Mænades and Corybantes
of antiquity, as under the semblance of religion among the Christians
and Mahomedans.

There are some denominations of English Methodists which surpass, if
possible, the French Convulsionnaires; and we may here mention, in
particular, the Jumpers, among whom it is still more difficult, than
in the example given above, to draw the line between religious ecstacy
and a perfect disorder of the nerves; sympathy, however, operates
perhaps more perniciously on them than on other fanatical assemblies.
The sect of Jumpers was founded in the year 1760, in the county of
Cornwall, by two fanatics[340], who were, even at that time, able to
collect together a considerable party. Their general doctrine is that
of the Methodists, and claims our consideration here, only in so far
as it enjoins them, during their devotional exercises, to fall into
convulsions, which they are able to effect in the strangest manner
imaginable. By the use of certain unmeaning words, they work themselves
up into a state of religious frenzy, in which they seem to have
scarcely any control over their senses. They then begin to jump with
strange gestures, repeating this exercise with all their might, until
they are exhausted, so that it not unfrequently happens that women,
who, like the Mænades, practise these religious exercises, are carried
away from the midst of them in a state of syncope, whilst the remaining
members of the congregations, for miles together, on their way home,
terrify those whom they meet by the sight of such demoniacal ravings.
There are never more than a few ecstatics, who, by their example,
excite the rest to jump, and these are followed by the greatest part
of the meeting, so that these assemblages of the Jumpers resemble, for
hours together, the wildest orgies, rather than congregations met for
Christian edification[341].

In the United States of North America, communities of Methodists
have existed for the last sixty years. The reports of credible
witnesses of their assemblages for divine service in the open-air
(camp meetings)[342], to which many thousands flock from great
distances[343], surpass, indeed, all belief; for not only do they
there repeat all the insane acts of the French Convulsionnaires and
of the English Jumpers, but the disorder of their minds and of their
nerves attains, at these meetings, a still greater height. Women have
been seen to miscarry whilst suffering under the state of ecstacy and
violent spasms into which they are thrown, and others have publicly
stripped themselves and jumped into the rivers. They have swooned
away[344] by hundreds, worn out with ravings and fits; and of the
Barkers, who appeared among the Convulsionnaires only here and there,
in single cases of complete aberration of intellect, whole bands are
seen running on all fours, and growling[345] as if they wished to
indicate, even by their outward form, the shocking degradation of their
human nature. At these camp-meetings the children are witnesses of
this mad infatuation, and as their weak nerves are, with the greatest
facility, affected by sympathy, they, together with their parents, fall
into violent fits, though they know nothing of their import, and many
of them retain for life some severe nervous disorder, which, having
arisen from fright and excessive excitement, will not afterwards yield
to any medical treatment[346].

But enough of these extravagances, which, even in our own days,
embitter the lives of so many thousands, and exhibit to the world, in
the nineteenth century, the same terrific form of mental disturbance as
the St. Vitus’s dance once did to the benighted nations of the middle
ages.




                               